tests/les_miserables.txt:2636:me. I understand him without his speaking, and we abandon ourselves to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3026:Dauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod. Innocence, Monsieur, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3870:Colbas_. This inn had for a landlord a certain Jacquin Labarre, a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:3872:Labarre, who kept the inn of the _Three Dauphins_ in Grenoble, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:3882:_Three Dauphins_. This glory of the Labarre of the _Three Dauphins_ was
tests/les_miserables.txt:3883:reflected upon the Labarre of the _Cross of Colbas_, at a distance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3930:turned, the worthy host, Jacquin Labarre, drew a pencil from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:4125:stable his horse at Labarre’s. It chanced that he had that very morning
tests/les_miserables.txt:4132:Labarre, and had himself related his disagreeable encounter of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4252:been to Labarre?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4586:in the town. He had presented himself at Jacquin Labarre’s to obtain
tests/les_miserables.txt:5151:heart of the cabbage,—to give to one of her children. As he went on
tests/les_miserables.txt:5199:abandonment of a sentient being! Jean Valjean was condemned to five
tests/les_miserables.txt:5702:alternative of death; he resists not; he lets himself go; he abandons
tests/les_miserables.txt:7506:the wind irritates me; the wind does not abate. Blachevelle is very
tests/les_miserables.txt:7566:Peter, Moses on Isaac, Æschylus on Polynices, Cleopatra on Octavius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7606:“Quirites, gentlemen, caballeros, my friends. Do you wish never to feel
tests/les_miserables.txt:8215:After abandonment, straightened circumstances. Fantine had immediately
tests/les_miserables.txt:8642:bringing up a poor child who was abandoned on their hands!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8712:the people at Montfermeil, seemed to have abandoned her child? Where
tests/les_miserables.txt:9868:abandoned her as she had taken him, in disgust.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16095:He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac. In the west he perceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:16286:Marques y Marquesa de Almagro (Habana)_. There are French names with
tests/les_miserables.txt:16486:worn out the blade as it had worn the scabbard, the soul as well as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17135:at the English barricades of the two highways,—two large abatis of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17754:Mont-Saint-Jean. There, abandoned, vanquished, terrible, those gloomy
tests/les_miserables.txt:17917:scabbard. At this epoch when Waterloo is only a clashing of swords,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17927:people, especially in our day, are neither elevated nor abased by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18421:pool in front of the abatis of trees which barred the way, at a spot
tests/les_miserables.txt:18664:them quitted the country, others abandoned the trade. Thenceforth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19386:“the cabaret of the Sergeant of Waterloo.” He was a liberal, a classic,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20775:abandoned his glass and hastened up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20886:abandoned her child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20918:of the little Thénardiers’ doll, which they had abandoned for the cat
tests/les_miserables.txt:22290:nothing but the abattoirs, the city wall, and the fronts of a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:23396:Should he abandon her? Jean Valjean did not once think of that. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24682:which contains an idea of torture and abasement.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25001:It was there that a little abandoned child, a foundling whom the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25652:letters-patent; and all the rest, abbatial charter, and royal letters,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25859:Labarre, and Sirven, declaimers. I know not who has recently discovered
tests/les_miserables.txt:29737:some sort, sacrificed and abandoned to a kind of fatal immersion in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29758:Let it be said by the way, that this abandonment of children was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:30021:Labatut’s posting-chaise; Aulus Gellius would halt no longer in front
tests/les_miserables.txt:30192:abandon them for that? Would you turn their distress into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30255:Nevertheless, abandoned as this child was, it sometimes happened, every
tests/les_miserables.txt:30587:taken aback, and really, you are excessively ignorant. M. le Duc
tests/les_miserables.txt:30594:Tabaraud, is the son of a man of eighty-seven. There is nothing out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30651:And, on abandoning society, he had immured himself in his habits. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:31329:with alabaster, with snow, with the swan and the lily in the name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31482:abandoned him to others. Feeling that he was not beloved, he did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:32473:abandoned, and who never committed but one mistake, which was to love
tests/les_miserables.txt:33379:that he grasped. On abandoning his grandfather’s opinions for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34189:misfortune, isolation, abandonment, poverty, are the fields of battle
tests/les_miserables.txt:34943:grow like a goat’s, thinks himself a real scoundrel, and abandons his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35641:abandoned their accustomed place and had adopted the bench by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35812:Marius went off quite abashed, but delighted. He was getting on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36108:extracts teeth, undertakes stumps abandoned by his brother
tests/les_miserables.txt:36123:Later on he had abandoned everything, in order to “undertake Paris.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36272:sometimes in the lime-kilns, sometimes in the abandoned quarries of
tests/les_miserables.txt:36536:    my last confinement, abandoned by my husband five months ago,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36633:Mistress Balizard, the poet Genflot, and dramatic artist Fabantou; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:36775:the dramatic poet Genflot, the old comedian Fabantou, were all four
tests/les_miserables.txt:37093:better than that. What! only a wall separated him from those abandoned
tests/les_miserables.txt:37739:“Fabantou,” replied the girl.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37751:“Fabantou,” replied Jondrette quickly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37753:“Monsieur Fabantou, yes, that is it. I remember.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37836:Deuce take it! None of that in the Fabantou family! I mean to bring
tests/les_miserables.txt:37866:“Monsieur Fabantou,” he said, “these five francs are all that I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:38073:the letter signed Fabantou had been addressed “to the benevolent
tests/les_miserables.txt:39567:“Monsieur Fabantou,” said he, “this is for your rent and your most
tests/les_miserables.txt:39636:“Madame Fabantou seems to me to be better,” went on M. Leblanc, casting
tests/les_miserables.txt:39651:“Jondrette!” said M. Leblanc, “I thought your name was Fabantou?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39654:“Fabantou, alias Jondrette!” replied the husband hurriedly. “An
tests/les_miserables.txt:39711:“Excuse me; what were you saying, M. Fabantou?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39937:“My name is not Fabantou, my name is not Jondrette, my name is
tests/les_miserables.txt:40080:actor, that my name was Fabantou, that I had played comedy with
tests/les_miserables.txt:41156:abandoned in all the corners at the moment of flight. In less than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42164:anguish to him to abandon these miserable, condemned heads. One day, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:42979:The cabarets of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine resemble those taverns of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43210:plain of Issy, in one of the abandoned quarries which are so numerous
tests/les_miserables.txt:44628:forgetfulness, forty years of abandonment and widowhood, had sufficed
tests/les_miserables.txt:45741:over these brows; at that degree of abasement, the last transformations
tests/les_miserables.txt:46471:phase of feminine reverie abandoned to itself, in which the isolated
tests/les_miserables.txt:47321:her husband: “But this is abandoning our children!” Thénardier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47455:barber wheeled round with a furious look, and without abandoning his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47893:“Well, yes, in the elephant!” retorted Gavroche. “Kekçaa?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47899:Kekçaa signifies: _Qu’est que c’est que cela a? _ [What’s the matter
tests/les_miserables.txt:48200:warts, with mould, and ulcers, tottering, worm-eaten, abandoned,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49100:abandon each other, had prowled all night long about La Force, great as
tests/les_miserables.txt:49479:wretchedness. There exists, at the extremity of all abasement and all
tests/les_miserables.txt:50015:Miralabi suslababo
tests/les_miserables.txt:50017:Surlababi mirlababo
tests/les_miserables.txt:51813:scabbard on the pavement. And then, throwing out your chest like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52896:contraband salt, a legitimate chronic revolt, which, at the decisive
tests/les_miserables.txt:52900:ignorance! The contraband salt dealer escapes the royal gibbets, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53003:Caracalla, thus it is under Commodus, thus it is under Heliogabalus,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53280:their scabbards, their guns slung in their leather sockets, with an air
tests/les_miserables.txt:53402:abandoned a barricade begun in the Rue de Temple after having fired on
tests/les_miserables.txt:54497:In the time of Mathurin Regnier, this cabaret was called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54504:the cabaret, in his joy, had changed his device and had caused to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:54515:in broad daylight,—this was the style of this cabaret. A staircase with
tests/les_miserables.txt:55030:attracted him. He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the beerglass.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56201:scattered and piled up. A barricade had been begun there and abandoned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56441:civil war, and I shall take my leave!” Should he abandon his friends
tests/les_miserables.txt:56747:attitude which he did not afterwards abandon, with both fists planted
tests/les_miserables.txt:57037:abandoning their dead and wounded, flowed back pell-mell and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58724:cabbage-stalk, the tatter, the rag, and the malediction. It was grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:58872:did as at Zaatcha, as at Constantine, they pierced the houses, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:59135:for. Neither from a faubourg nor from a regiment. You are abandoned.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59149:corpses. Let us show that, if the people abandon the republicans, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59150:republicans do not abandon the people.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59306:abandoned? I have seen one, a very small creature, no taller than that.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59323:abandoned children is fifty-five per cent. I repeat, it is a question
tests/les_miserables.txt:59466:prisoner.” The moment was too grave to admit of the sentinel abandoning
tests/les_miserables.txt:60393:that roof; and the idea of spying on the barricade was abandoned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60701:and from the windows of the cabaret by grape-shot, the attacking
tests/les_miserables.txt:61110:The two little abandoned creatures had arrived in the vicinity of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61846:not let itself go at random. Then it abandons the insurrection to
tests/les_miserables.txt:61887:them, and its magnanimity consists in consenting to abandonment. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:61901:meditates, in the presence of some splendid Canaan suddenly unveiled on
tests/les_miserables.txt:62114:humor seizes upon her, and again abandons her. And therein lies the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62131:devotion is disinterestedness. Let the abandoned allow themselves to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:62132:abandoned, let the exiled allow themselves to be exiled, and let us
tests/les_miserables.txt:62143:asked how it happens that it has abandoned Socrates for Falstaff, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:62252:and who abandon us!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:63095:turn which characters have taken as they became abased, the trace of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63108:ago, the cesspool, Mercier attests the fact, was abandoned to itself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64079:this fact to abandon all dissimulation and to walk very rapidly. In a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64810:stop up that hole, would certainly have found the stiff abandoned
tests/les_miserables.txt:66090:abandoned a quarter of an hour previously, leaned on his elbows and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66289:abandoned or forgotten, and a hole.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67219:cabbages! people amused themselves. To-day, people are serious. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:67386:rich; he, the abandoned, had a family; he, the despairing, was to marry
tests/les_miserables.txt:68654:their wooden shoes. He, Jean Valjean, had made her abandon those rags
tests/les_miserables.txt:71017:His portress, who prepared his scanty repasts, a few cabbages or
tests/les_miserables.txt:71673:“You are also Jondrette the workman, Fabantou the comedian, Genflot the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71702:“Five hundred francs!” he began again, taken aback. And he stammered in
tests/les_miserables.txt:71777:to have abandoned his position, to have changed his front; but nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:72316:“‘You fancy that you are about to be abandoned, stupid! No. No, things
