tests/les_miserables.txt:1:﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Les Misérables
tests/les_miserables.txt:4:most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
tests/les_miserables.txt:5:whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
tests/les_miserables.txt:6:of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
tests/les_miserables.txt:7:at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8:you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
tests/les_miserables.txt:13:Author: Victor Hugo
tests/les_miserables.txt:15:Translator: Isabel Florence Hapgood
tests/les_miserables.txt:18:                Most recently updated: October 29, 2024
tests/les_miserables.txt:29:By Victor Hugo
tests/les_miserables.txt:36: No. 13, Astor Place
tests/les_miserables.txt:45:[Illustration: Bookcover]
tests/les_miserables.txt:49:[Illustration: Frontispiece]
tests/les_miserables.txt:997: Bookcover
tests/les_miserables.txt:1001: Frontispiece Volume One
tests/les_miserables.txt:1015: Candlesticks Into the Fire
tests/les_miserables.txt:1019: Frontispiece Volume Two
tests/les_miserables.txt:1023: The Ship Orion, an Accident
tests/les_miserables.txt:1027: The Black Hunt
tests/les_miserables.txt:1031: The Resurrection
tests/les_miserables.txt:1035: Frontispiece Volume Three
tests/les_miserables.txt:1039: Little Gavroche
tests/les_miserables.txt:1043: Excellence of Misfortune
tests/les_miserables.txt:1049: Snatched up a Paving Stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:1051: Frontispiece Volume Four
tests/les_miserables.txt:1059: Succor from Below
tests/les_miserables.txt:1067: Frontispiece Volume Five
tests/les_miserables.txt:1073: The Twilight Decline
tests/les_miserables.txt:1087:So long as there shall exist, by virtue of law and custom, decrees of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1088:damnation pronounced by society, artificially creating hells amid the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1089:civilization of earth, and adding the element of human fate to divine
tests/les_miserables.txt:1090:destiny; so long as the three great problems of the century—the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1091:degradation of man through pauperism, the corruption of woman through
tests/les_miserables.txt:1092:hunger, the crippling of children through lack of light—are unsolved;
tests/les_miserables.txt:1093:so long as social asphyxia is possible in any part of the world;—in
tests/les_miserables.txt:1094:other words, and with a still wider significance, so long as ignorance
tests/les_miserables.txt:1096:cannot fail to be of use.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1117:an old man of about seventy-five years of age; he had occupied the see
tests/les_miserables.txt:1118:of D—— since 1806.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1120:Although this detail has no connection whatever with the real substance
tests/les_miserables.txt:1122:for the sake of exactness in all points, to mention here the various
tests/les_miserables.txt:1123:rumors and remarks which had been in circulation about him from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1124:very moment when he arrived in the diocese. True or false, that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:1125:is said of men often occupies as important a place in their lives, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1126:above all in their destinies, as that which they do. M. Myriel was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1127:son of a councillor of the Parliament of Aix; hence he belonged to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1130:or twenty, in accordance with a custom which is rather widely prevalent
tests/les_miserables.txt:1132:said that Charles Myriel created a great deal of talk. He was well
tests/les_miserables.txt:1133:formed, though rather short in stature, elegant, graceful, intelligent;
tests/les_miserables.txt:1137:The Revolution came; events succeeded each other with precipitation;
tests/les_miserables.txt:1138:the parliamentary families, decimated, pursued, hunted down, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:1140:of the Revolution. There his wife died of a malady of the chest, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:1141:which she had long suffered. He had no children. What took place next
tests/les_miserables.txt:1142:in the fate of M. Myriel? The ruin of the French society of the olden
tests/les_miserables.txt:1143:days, the fall of his own family, the tragic spectacles of ’93, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:1145:a distance, with the magnifying powers of terror,—did these cause the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1146:ideas of renunciation and solitude to germinate in him? Was he, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1147:midst of these distractions, these affections which absorbed his life,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1148:suddenly smitten with one of those mysterious and terrible blows which
tests/les_miserables.txt:1149:sometimes overwhelm, by striking to his heart, a man whom public
tests/les_miserables.txt:1150:catastrophes would not shake, by striking at his existence and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:1151:fortune? No one could have told: all that was known was, that when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:1155:advanced in years, and lived in a very retired manner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1157:About the epoch of the coronation, some petty affair connected with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:1158:curacy—just what, is not precisely known—took him to Paris. Among other
tests/les_miserables.txt:1159:powerful persons to whom he went to solicit aid for his parishioners
tests/les_miserables.txt:1160:was M. le Cardinal Fesch. One day, when the Emperor had come to visit
tests/les_miserables.txt:1161:his uncle, the worthy Curé, who was waiting in the anteroom, found
tests/les_miserables.txt:1163:observed with a certain curiosity by this old man, turned round and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1170:great man. Each of us can profit by it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1177:What truth was there, after all, in the stories which were invented as
tests/les_miserables.txt:1179:families had been acquainted with the Myriel family before the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1182:M. Myriel had to undergo the fate of every newcomer in a little town,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1183:where there are many mouths which talk, and very few heads which think.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1184:He was obliged to undergo it although he was a bishop, and because he
tests/les_miserables.txt:1185:was a bishop. But after all, the rumors with which his name was
tests/les_miserables.txt:1186:connected were rumors only,—noise, sayings, words; less than
tests/les_miserables.txt:1187:words—_palabres_, as the energetic language of the South expresses it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1189:However that may be, after nine years of episcopal power and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1190:residence in D——, all the stories and subjects of conversation which
tests/les_miserables.txt:1193:would have dared to recall them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1195:M. Myriel had arrived at D—— accompanied by an elderly spinster,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1198:Their only domestic was a female servant of the same age as
tests/les_miserables.txt:1203:Mademoiselle Baptistine was a long, pale, thin, gentle creature; she
tests/les_miserables.txt:1204:realized the ideal expressed by the word “respectable”; for it seems
tests/les_miserables.txt:1206:never been pretty; her whole life, which had been nothing but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1207:succession of holy deeds, had finally conferred upon her a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1208:pallor and transparency; and as she advanced in years she had acquired
tests/les_miserables.txt:1209:what may be called the beauty of goodness. What had been leanness in
tests/les_miserables.txt:1210:her youth had become transparency in her maturity; and this diaphaneity
tests/les_miserables.txt:1212:person seemed made of a shadow; there was hardly sufficient body to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1213:provide for sex; a little matter enclosing a light; large eyes forever
tests/les_miserables.txt:1216:Madame Magloire was a little, fat, white old woman, corpulent and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1217:bustling; always out of breath,—in the first place, because of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:1218:activity, and in the next, because of her asthma.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1220:On his arrival, M. Myriel was installed in the episcopal palace with
tests/les_miserables.txt:1221:the honors required by the Imperial decrees, which class a bishop
tests/les_miserables.txt:1223:first call on him, and he, in turn, paid the first call on the general
tests/les_miserables.txt:1224:and the prefect.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1233:The episcopal palace of D—— adjoins the hospital.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1235:The episcopal palace was a huge and beautiful house, built of stone at
tests/les_miserables.txt:1236:the beginning of the last century by M. Henri Puget, Doctor of Theology
tests/les_miserables.txt:1237:of the Faculty of Paris, Abbé of Simore, who had been Bishop of D—— in
tests/les_miserables.txt:1238:1712. This palace was a genuine seignorial residence. Everything about
tests/les_miserables.txt:1240:the chambers, the principal courtyard, which was very large, with walks
tests/les_miserables.txt:1241:encircling it under arcades in the old Florentine fashion, and gardens
tests/les_miserables.txt:1242:planted with magnificent trees. In the dining-room, a long and superb
tests/les_miserables.txt:1243:gallery which was situated on the ground floor and opened on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1245:Lords Charles Brûlart de Genlis, archbishop; Prince d’Embrun; Antoine
tests/les_miserables.txt:1246:de Mesgrigny, the capuchin, Bishop of Grasse; Philippe de Vendôme,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1247:Grand Prior of France, Abbé of Saint Honoré de Lérins; François de
tests/les_miserables.txt:1248:Berton de Crillon, bishop, Baron de Vence; César de Sabran de
tests/les_miserables.txt:1249:Forcalquier, bishop, Seignor of Glandève; and Jean Soanen, Priest of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1250:the Oratory, preacher in ordinary to the king, bishop, Seignor of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1251:Senez. The portraits of these seven reverend personages decorated this
tests/les_miserables.txt:1259:visit ended, he had the director requested to be so good as to come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1262:“Monsieur the director of the hospital,” said he to him, “how many sick
tests/les_miserables.txt:1269:“That was the number which I counted,” said the Bishop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1271:“The beds,” pursued the director, “are very much crowded against each
tests/les_miserables.txt:1278:“The halls are nothing but rooms, and it is with difficulty that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1279:air can be changed in them.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1286:convalescents.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1292:“In case of epidemics,—we have had the typhus fever this year; we had
tests/les_miserables.txt:1293:the sweating sickness two years ago, and a hundred patients at
tests/les_miserables.txt:1297:“That is the thought which occurred to me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1300:“What would you have, Monseigneur?” said the director. “One must resign
tests/les_miserables.txt:1304:This conversation took place in the gallery dining-room on the ground
tests/les_miserables.txt:1308:director of the hospital.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1314:“Monseigneur’s dining-room?” exclaimed the stupefied director.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1316:The Bishop cast a glance round the apartment, and seemed to be taking
tests/les_miserables.txt:1317:measures and calculations with his eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1320:himself. Then, raising his voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:1322:“Hold, Monsieur the director of the hospital, I will tell you
tests/les_miserables.txt:1326:house, and I have yours. Give me back my house; you are at home here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1330:Bishop’s palace, and the Bishop was settled in the hospital.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1333:Revolution. His sister was in receipt of a yearly income of five
tests/les_miserables.txt:1334:hundred francs, which sufficed for her personal wants at the vicarage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1335:M. Myriel received from the State, in his quality of bishop, a salary
tests/les_miserables.txt:1336:of fifteen thousand francs. On the very day when he took up his abode
tests/les_miserables.txt:1337:in the hospital, M. Myriel settled on the disposition of this sum once
tests/les_miserables.txt:1338:for all, in the following manner. We transcribe here a note made by his
tests/les_miserables.txt:1344:Society of the  mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      100   ”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1349: Charitable maternity societies  . . . . . . . . . .      300   ”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1353: To liberate fathers of families incarcerated for debt  1,000   ”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1354: Addition to the salary of the poor teachers of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1355:diocese  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2,000   ”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1356: Public granary of the Hautes-Alpes  . . . . . . . .      100   ”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1358:Sisteron, for the gratuitous instruction of poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:1366:M. Myriel made no change in this arrangement during the entire period
tests/les_miserables.txt:1367:that he occupied the see of D—— As has been seen, he called it
tests/les_miserables.txt:1370:This arrangement was accepted with absolute submission by Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:1372:the same time her brother and her bishop, her friend according to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1373:flesh and her superior according to the Church. She simply loved and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1374:venerated him. When he spoke, she bowed; when he acted, she yielded her
tests/les_miserables.txt:1375:adherence. Their only servant, Madame Magloire, grumbled a little. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:1377:one thousand livres, which, added to the pension of Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:1378:Baptistine, made fifteen hundred francs a year. On these fifteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:1379:hundred francs these two old women and the old man subsisted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1381:And when a village curate came to D——, the Bishop still found means to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1382:entertain him, thanks to the severe economy of Madame Magloire, and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1387:“And still I am quite cramped with it all!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1390:“I should think so!” exclaimed Madame Magloire. “Monseigneur has not
tests/les_miserables.txt:1391:even claimed the allowance which the department owes him for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1392:expense of his carriage in town, and for his journeys about the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1393:diocese. It was customary for bishops in former days.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1396:“Hold!” cried the Bishop, “you are quite right, Madame Magloire.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1401:Some time afterwards the General Council took this demand under
tests/les_miserables.txt:1402:consideration, and voted him an annual sum of three thousand francs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1403:under this heading: _Allowance to M. the Bishop for expenses of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1404:carriage, expenses of posting, and expenses of pastoral visits._
tests/les_miserables.txt:1406:This provoked a great outcry among the local burgesses; and a senator
tests/les_miserables.txt:1407:of the Empire, a former member of the Council of the Five Hundred which
tests/les_miserables.txt:1408:favored the 18 Brumaire, and who was provided with a magnificent
tests/les_miserables.txt:1409:senatorial office in the vicinity of the town of D——, wrote to M. Bigot
tests/les_miserables.txt:1410:de Préameneu, the minister of public worship, a very angry and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1411:confidential note on the subject, from which we extract these authentic
tests/les_miserables.txt:1414:“Expenses of carriage? What can be done with it in a town of less than
tests/les_miserables.txt:1416:these trips, in the first place? Next, how can the posting be
tests/les_miserables.txt:1417:accomplished in these mountainous parts? There are no roads. No one
tests/les_miserables.txt:1418:travels otherwise than on horseback. Even the bridge between Durance
tests/les_miserables.txt:1419:and Château-Arnoux can barely support ox-teams. These priests are all
tests/les_miserables.txt:1420:thus, greedy and avaricious. This man played the good priest when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:1421:first came. Now he does like the rest; he must have a carriage and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1422:posting-chaise, he must have luxuries, like the bishops of the olden
tests/les_miserables.txt:1424:until the Emperor has freed us from these black-capped rascals. Down
tests/les_miserables.txt:1426:I am for Cæsar alone.” Etc., etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1431:all. He has regulated all his charities. Now here are three thousand
tests/les_miserables.txt:1432:francs for us! At last!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1436:memorandum conceived in the following terms:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:1441:For the maternity charitable society of Aix . . . . . . .   250   ”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1442: For the maternity charitable society of Draguignan  . . .   250   ”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1449:Such was M. Myriel’s budget.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1451:As for the chance episcopal perquisites, the fees for marriage bans,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1452:dispensations, private baptisms, sermons, benedictions, of churches or
tests/les_miserables.txt:1453:chapels, marriages, etc., the Bishop levied them on the wealthy with
tests/les_miserables.txt:1454:all the more asperity, since he bestowed them on the needy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1457:lacked knocked at M. Myriel’s door,—the latter in search of the alms
tests/les_miserables.txt:1458:which the former came to deposit. In less than a year the Bishop had
tests/les_miserables.txt:1459:become the treasurer of all benevolence and the cashier of all those in
tests/les_miserables.txt:1461:nothing could induce him to make any change whatever in his mode of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1462:life, or add anything superfluous to his bare necessities.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1464:Far from it. As there is always more wretchedness below than there is
tests/les_miserables.txt:1466:received. It was like water on dry soil; no matter how much money he
tests/les_miserables.txt:1467:received, he never had any. Then he stripped himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1469:The usage being that bishops shall announce their baptismal names at
tests/les_miserables.txt:1470:the head of their charges and their pastoral letters, the poor people
tests/les_miserables.txt:1471:of the country-side had selected, with a sort of affectionate instinct,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1472:among the names and prenomens of their bishop, that which had a meaning
tests/les_miserables.txt:1473:for them; and they never called him anything except Monseigneur
tests/les_miserables.txt:1474:Bienvenu [Welcome]. We will follow their example, and will also call
tests/les_miserables.txt:1475:him thus when we have occasion to name him. Moreover, this appellation
tests/les_miserables.txt:1481:We do not claim that the portrait herewith presented is probable; we
tests/les_miserables.txt:1482:confine ourselves to stating that it resembles the original.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1490:The Bishop did not omit his pastoral visits because he had converted
tests/les_miserables.txt:1491:his carriage into alms. The diocese of D—— is a fatiguing one. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:1493:have just seen; thirty-two curacies, forty-one vicarships, and two
tests/les_miserables.txt:1494:hundred and eighty-five auxiliary chapels. To visit all these is quite
tests/les_miserables.txt:1498:neighborhood, in a tilted spring-cart when it was on the plain, and on
tests/les_miserables.txt:1499:a donkey in the mountains. The two old women accompanied him. When the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1502:One day he arrived at Senez, which is an ancient episcopal city. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:1503:mounted on an ass. His purse, which was very dry at that moment, did
tests/les_miserables.txt:1504:not permit him any other equipage. The mayor of the town came to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1505:receive him at the gate of the town, and watched him dismount from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:1506:ass, with scandalized eyes. Some of the citizens were laughing around
tests/les_miserables.txt:1508:perceive that I shock you. You think it very arrogant in a poor priest
tests/les_miserables.txt:1509:to ride an animal which was used by Jesus Christ. I have done so from
tests/les_miserables.txt:1510:necessity, I assure you, and not from vanity.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1513:In the course of these trips he was kind and indulgent, and talked
tests/les_miserables.txt:1514:rather than preached. He never went far in search of his arguments and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1515:his examples. He quoted to the inhabitants of one district the example
tests/les_miserables.txt:1516:of a neighboring district. In the cantons where they were harsh to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1517:poor, he said: “Look at the people of Briançon! They have conferred on
tests/les_miserables.txt:1519:three days in advance of every one else. They rebuild their houses for
tests/les_miserables.txt:1520:them gratuitously when they are ruined. Therefore it is a country which
tests/les_miserables.txt:1521:is blessed by God. For a whole century, there has not been a single
tests/les_miserables.txt:1525:In villages which were greedy for profit and harvest, he said: “Look at
tests/les_miserables.txt:1527:has his son away on service in the army, and his daughters at service
tests/les_miserables.txt:1528:in the town, and if he is ill and incapacitated, the curé recommends
tests/les_miserables.txt:1529:him to the prayers of the congregation; and on Sunday, after the mass,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1530:all the inhabitants of the village—men, women, and children—go to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1531:poor man’s field and do his harvesting for him, and carry his straw and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1533:and inheritance he said: “Look at the mountaineers of Devolny, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1534:country so wild that the nightingale is not heard there once in fifty
tests/les_miserables.txt:1537:find husbands.” To the cantons which had a taste for lawsuits, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1540:souls of them. Mon Dieu! it is like a little republic. Neither judge
tests/les_miserables.txt:1542:imposts, taxes each person conscientiously, judges quarrels for
tests/les_miserables.txt:1543:nothing, divides inheritances without charge, pronounces sentences
tests/les_miserables.txt:1544:gratuitously; and he is obeyed, because he is a just man among simple
tests/les_miserables.txt:1545:men.” To villages where he found no schoolmaster, he quoted once more
tests/les_miserables.txt:1546:the people of Queyras: “Do you know how they manage?” he said. “Since a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1547:little country of a dozen or fifteen hearths cannot always support a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1548:teacher, they have schoolmasters who are paid by the whole valley, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:1550:in that, and instruct them. These teachers go to the fairs. I have seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:1551:them there. They are to be recognized by the quill pens which they wear
tests/les_miserables.txt:1552:in the cord of their hat. Those who teach reading only have one pen;
tests/les_miserables.txt:1553:those who teach reading and reckoning have two pens; those who teach
tests/les_miserables.txt:1554:reading, reckoning, and Latin have three pens. But what a disgrace to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1558:Thus he discoursed gravely and paternally; in default of examples, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:1559:invented parables, going directly to the point, with few phrases and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1560:many images, which characteristic formed the real eloquence of Jesus
tests/les_miserables.txt:1561:Christ. And being convinced himself, he was persuasive.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1569:His conversation was gay and affable. He put himself on a level with
tests/les_miserables.txt:1571:laughed, it was the laugh of a schoolboy. Madame Magloire liked to call
tests/les_miserables.txt:1572:him Your Grace [_Votre Grandeur_]. One day he rose from his armchair,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1573:and went to his library in search of a book. This book was on one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1574:the upper shelves. As the bishop was rather short of stature, he could
tests/les_miserables.txt:1575:not reach it. “Madame Magloire,” said he, “fetch me a chair. My
tests/les_miserables.txt:1576:greatness [_grandeur_] does not reach as far as that shelf.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1580:an opportunity to escape of enumerating, in his presence, what she
tests/les_miserables.txt:1581:designated as “the expectations” of her three sons. She had numerous
tests/les_miserables.txt:1583:were the natural heirs. The youngest of the three was to receive from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1584:grandaunt a good hundred thousand livres of income; the second was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1585:heir by entail to the title of the Duke, his uncle; the eldest was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1586:succeed to the peerage of his grandfather. The Bishop was accustomed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1587:listen in silence to these innocent and pardonable maternal boasts. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:1588:one occasion, however, he appeared to be more thoughtful than usual,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1589:while Madame de Lô was relating once again the details of all these
tests/les_miserables.txt:1590:inheritances and all these “expectations.” She interrupted herself
tests/les_miserables.txt:1591:impatiently: “Mon Dieu, cousin! What are you thinking about?” “I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:1592:thinking,” replied the Bishop, “of a singular remark, which is to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:1593:found, I believe, in St. Augustine,—‘Place your hopes in the man from
tests/les_miserables.txt:1597:At another time, on receiving a notification of the decease of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1598:gentleman of the country-side, wherein not only the dignities of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1599:dead man, but also the feudal and noble qualifications of all his
tests/les_miserables.txt:1600:relatives, spread over an entire page: “What a stout back Death has!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1601:he exclaimed. “What a strange burden of titles is cheerfully imposed on
tests/les_miserables.txt:1602:him, and how much wit must men have, in order thus to press the tomb
tests/les_miserables.txt:1603:into the service of vanity!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1606:He was gifted, on occasion, with a gentle raillery, which almost always
tests/les_miserables.txt:1607:concealed a serious meaning. In the course of one Lent, a youthful
tests/les_miserables.txt:1608:vicar came to D——, and preached in the cathedral. He was tolerably
tests/les_miserables.txt:1609:eloquent. The subject of his sermon was charity. He urged the rich to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1610:give to the poor, in order to avoid hell, which he depicted in the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:1611:frightful manner of which he was capable, and to win paradise, which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:1612:represented as charming and desirable. Among the audience there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1613:wealthy retired merchant, who was somewhat of a usurer, named M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1614:Géborand, who had amassed two millions in the manufacture of coarse
tests/les_miserables.txt:1615:cloth, serges, and woollen galloons. Never in his whole life had M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1616:Géborand bestowed alms on any poor wretch. After the delivery of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:1618:beggar-women at the door of the cathedral. There were six of them to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1619:share it. One day the Bishop caught sight of him in the act of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1620:bestowing this charity, and said to his sister, with a smile, “There is
tests/les_miserables.txt:1621:M. Géborand purchasing paradise for a sou.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1624:When it was a question of charity, he was not to be rebuffed even by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1625:refusal, and on such occasions he gave utterance to remarks which
tests/les_miserables.txt:1626:induced reflection. Once he was begging for the poor in a drawing-room
tests/les_miserables.txt:1627:of the town; there was present the Marquis de Champtercier, a wealthy
tests/les_miserables.txt:1628:and avaricious old man, who contrived to be, at one and the same time,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1630:actually existed. When the Bishop came to him, he touched his arm,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1635:One day he preached the following sermon in the cathedral:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:1638:twenty thousand peasants’ dwellings in France which have but three
tests/les_miserables.txt:1639:openings; eighteen hundred and seventeen thousand hovels which have but
tests/les_miserables.txt:1641:thousand cabins besides which have but one opening, the door. And this
tests/les_miserables.txt:1642:arises from a thing which is called the tax on doors and windows. Just
tests/les_miserables.txt:1643:put poor families, old women and little children, in those buildings,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1644:and behold the fevers and maladies which result! Alas! God gives air to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1648:wheelbarrows; they transport their manure on the backs of men; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:1649:have no candles, and they burn resinous sticks, and bits of rope dipped
tests/les_miserables.txt:1650:in pitch. That is the state of affairs throughout the whole of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1651:hilly country of Dauphiné. They make bread for six months at one time;
tests/les_miserables.txt:1652:they bake it with dried cow-dung. In the winter they break this bread
tests/les_miserables.txt:1658:Born a Provençal, he easily familiarized himself with the dialect of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1659:the south. He said, _“En bé! moussu, sés sagé?”_ as in lower Languedoc;
tests/les_miserables.txt:1662:people extremely, and contributed not a little to win him access to all
tests/les_miserables.txt:1663:spirits. He was perfectly at home in the thatched cottage and in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1668:lower classes. He condemned nothing in haste and without taking
tests/les_miserables.txt:1669:circumstances into account. He said, “Examine the road over which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1673:Being, as he described himself with a smile, an _ex-sinner_, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:1675:of distinctness, and without the frown of the ferociously virtuous, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1676:doctrine which may be summed up as follows:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:1678:“Man has upon him his flesh, which is at once his burden and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:1679:temptation. He drags it with him and yields to it. He must watch it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1680:check it, repress it, and obey it only at the last extremity. There may
tests/les_miserables.txt:1681:be some fault even in this obedience; but the fault thus committed is
tests/les_miserables.txt:1682:venial; it is a fall, but a fall on the knees which may terminate in
tests/les_miserables.txt:1685:“To be a saint is the exception; to be an upright man is the rule. Err,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1689:of the angel. All which is terrestrial is subject to sin. Sin is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1693:When he saw everyone exclaiming very loudly, and growing angry very
tests/les_miserables.txt:1694:quickly, “Oh! oh!” he said, with a smile; “to all appearance, this is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1695:great crime which all the world commits. These are hypocrisies which
tests/les_miserables.txt:1701:human society rest. He said, “The faults of women, of children, of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1703:the fathers, the masters, the strong, the rich, and the wise.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1706:He said, moreover, “Teach those who are ignorant as many things as
tests/les_miserables.txt:1707:possible; society is culpable, in that it does not afford instruction
tests/les_miserables.txt:1708:gratis; it is responsible for the night which it produces. This soul is
tests/les_miserables.txt:1709:full of shadow; sin is therein committed. The guilty one is not the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1710:person who has committed the sin, but the person who has created the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1714:It will be perceived that he had a peculiar manner of his own of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1715:judging things: I suspect that he obtained it from the Gospel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1717:One day he heard a criminal case, which was in preparation and on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1718:point of trial, discussed in a drawing-room. A wretched man, being at
tests/les_miserables.txt:1719:the end of his resources, had coined counterfeit money, out of love for
tests/les_miserables.txt:1720:a woman, and for the child which he had had by her. Counterfeiting was
tests/les_miserables.txt:1721:still punishable with death at that epoch. The woman had been arrested
tests/les_miserables.txt:1722:in the act of passing the first false piece made by the man. She was
tests/les_miserables.txt:1723:held, but there were no proofs except against her. She alone could
tests/les_miserables.txt:1724:accuse her lover, and destroy him by her confession. She denied; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:1725:insisted. She persisted in her denial. Thereupon an idea occurred to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1726:the attorney for the crown. He invented an infidelity on the part of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1727:the lover, and succeeded, by means of fragments of letters cunningly
tests/les_miserables.txt:1729:and that the man was deceiving her. Thereupon, exasperated by jealousy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1730:she denounced her lover, confessed all, proved all.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1733:accomplice. They were relating the matter, and each one was expressing
tests/les_miserables.txt:1734:enthusiasm over the cleverness of the magistrate. By bringing jealousy
tests/les_miserables.txt:1735:into play, he had caused the truth to burst forth in wrath, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:1736:educed the justice of revenge. The Bishop listened to all this in
tests/les_miserables.txt:1737:silence. When they had finished, he inquired,—
tests/les_miserables.txt:1745:He went on, “And where will the advocate of the crown be tried?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1748:A tragic event occurred at D—— A man was condemned to death for murder.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1749:He was a wretched fellow, not exactly educated, not exactly ignorant,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1750:who had been a mountebank at fairs, and a writer for the public. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:1752:for the execution of the condemned man, the chaplain of the prison fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:1753:ill. A priest was needed to attend the criminal in his last moments.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1754:They sent for the curé. It seems that he refused to come, saying, “That
tests/les_miserables.txt:1757:place.” This reply was reported to the Bishop, who said, _“Monsieur le
tests/les_miserables.txt:1758:Curé is right: it is not his place; it is mine.”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:1760:He went instantly to the prison, descended to the cell of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1761:“mountebank,” called him by name, took him by the hand, and spoke to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1763:praying to God for the soul of the condemned man, and praying the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1764:condemned man for his own. He told him the best truths, which are also
tests/les_miserables.txt:1766:bless. He taught him everything, encouraged and consoled him. The man
tests/les_miserables.txt:1768:stood trembling on its mournful brink, he recoiled with horror. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:1769:not sufficiently ignorant to be absolutely indifferent. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:1770:condemnation, which had been a profound shock, had, in a manner, broken
tests/les_miserables.txt:1771:through, here and there, that wall which separates us from the mystery
tests/les_miserables.txt:1772:of things, and which we call life. He gazed incessantly beyond this
tests/les_miserables.txt:1773:world through these fatal breaches, and beheld only darkness. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:1776:On the following day, when they came to fetch the unhappy wretch, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1778:eyes of the crowd in his purple camail and with his episcopal cross
tests/les_miserables.txt:1779:upon his neck, side by side with the criminal bound with cords.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1781:He mounted the tumbril with him, he mounted the scaffold with him. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:1782:sufferer, who had been so gloomy and cast down on the preceding day,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1783:was radiant. He felt that his soul was reconciled, and he hoped in God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1784:The Bishop embraced him, and at the moment when the knife was about to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1786:whom his brothers have rejected finds his Father once more. Pray,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1787:believe, enter into life: the Father is there.” When he descended from
tests/les_miserables.txt:1788:the scaffold, there was something in his look which made the people
tests/les_miserables.txt:1789:draw aside to let him pass. They did not know which was most worthy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1791:dwelling, which he designated, with a smile, as _his palace_, he said
tests/les_miserables.txt:1792:to his sister, _“I have just officiated pontifically.”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:1794:Since the most sublime things are often those which are the least
tests/les_miserables.txt:1795:understood, there were people in the town who said, when commenting on
tests/les_miserables.txt:1796:this conduct of the Bishop, _“It is affectation.”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:1798:This, however, was a remark which was confined to the drawing-rooms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1799:The populace, which perceives no jest in holy deeds, was touched, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1802:As for the Bishop, it was a shock to him to have beheld the guillotine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1803:and it was a long time before he recovered from it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1805:In fact, when the scaffold is there, all erected and prepared, it has
tests/les_miserables.txt:1806:something about it which produces hallucination. One may feel a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:1807:indifference to the death penalty, one may refrain from pronouncing
tests/les_miserables.txt:1809:guillotine with one’s own eyes: but if one encounters one of them, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1810:shock is violent; one is forced to decide, and to take part for or
tests/les_miserables.txt:1811:against. Some admire it, like de Maistre; others execrate it, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:1812:Beccaria. The guillotine is the concretion of the law; it is called
tests/les_miserables.txt:1813:_vindicate_; it is not neutral, and it does not permit you to remain
tests/les_miserables.txt:1815:All social problems erect their interrogation point around this
tests/les_miserables.txt:1816:chopping-knife. The scaffold is a vision. The scaffold is not a piece
tests/les_miserables.txt:1817:of carpentry; the scaffold is not a machine; the scaffold is not an
tests/les_miserables.txt:1818:inert bit of mechanism constructed of wood, iron and cords.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1821:initiative; one would say that this piece of carpenter’s work saw, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:1822:this machine heard, that this mechanism understood, that this wood,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1823:this iron, and these cords were possessed of will. In the frightful
tests/les_miserables.txt:1824:meditation into which its presence casts the soul the scaffold appears
tests/les_miserables.txt:1826:scaffold is the accomplice of the executioner; it devours, it eats
tests/les_miserables.txt:1827:flesh, it drinks blood; the scaffold is a sort of monster fabricated by
tests/les_miserables.txt:1828:the judge and the carpenter, a spectre which seems to live with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1829:horrible vitality composed of all the death which it has inflicted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1832:following the execution, and on many succeeding days, the Bishop
tests/les_miserables.txt:1833:appeared to be crushed. The almost violent serenity of the funereal
tests/les_miserables.txt:1834:moment had disappeared; the phantom of social justice tormented him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1836:satisfaction, seemed to be reproaching himself. At times he talked to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1837:himself, and stammered lugubrious monologues in a low voice. This is
tests/les_miserables.txt:1838:one which his sister overheard one evening and preserved: “I did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:1839:think that it was so monstrous. It is wrong to become absorbed in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1840:divine law to such a degree as not to perceive human law. Death belongs
tests/les_miserables.txt:1841:to God alone. By what right do men touch that unknown thing?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:1844:In course of time these impressions weakened and probably vanished.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1845:Nevertheless, it was observed that the Bishop thenceforth avoided
tests/les_miserables.txt:1846:passing the place of execution.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1848:M. Myriel could be summoned at any hour to the bedside of the sick and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1849:dying. He did not ignore the fact that therein lay his greatest duty
tests/les_miserables.txt:1851:summon him; he came of his own accord. He understood how to sit down
tests/les_miserables.txt:1852:and hold his peace for long hours beside the man who had lost the wife
tests/les_miserables.txt:1853:of his love, of the mother who had lost her child. As he knew the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1854:moment for silence he knew also the moment for speech. Oh, admirable
tests/les_miserables.txt:1855:consoler! He sought not to efface sorrow by forgetfulness, but to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1858:“Have a care of the manner in which you turn towards the dead. Think
tests/les_miserables.txt:1859:not of that which perishes. Gaze steadily. You will perceive the living
tests/les_miserables.txt:1861:faith is wholesome. He sought to counsel and calm the despairing man,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1863:which gazes upon a grave by showing him the grief which fixes its gaze
tests/les_miserables.txt:1873:public life. The voluntary poverty in which the Bishop of D—— lived,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1874:would have been a solemn and charming sight for any one who could have
tests/les_miserables.txt:1875:viewed it close at hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1879:hour, then he said his mass, either at the cathedral or in his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:1881:of his own cows. Then he set to work.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1883:A Bishop is a very busy man: he must every day receive the secretary of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1884:the bishopric, who is generally a canon, and nearly every day his
tests/les_miserables.txt:1885:vicars-general. He has congregations to reprove, privileges to grant, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1886:whole ecclesiastical library to examine,—prayer-books, diocesan
tests/les_miserables.txt:1887:catechisms, books of hours, etc.,—charges to write, sermons to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1888:authorize, curés and mayors to reconcile, a clerical correspondence, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:1889:administrative correspondence; on one side the State, on the other the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1893:and his offices and his breviary, he bestowed first on the necessitous,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1894:the sick, and the afflicted; the time which was left to him from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1895:afflicted, the sick, and the necessitous, he devoted to work. Sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:1897:both these kinds of toil; he called them _gardening_. “The mind is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1901:stroll in the country or in town, often entering lowly dwellings. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:1902:was seen walking alone, buried in his own thoughts, his eyes cast down,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1903:supporting himself on his long cane, clad in his wadded purple garment
tests/les_miserables.txt:1904:of silk, which was very warm, wearing purple stockings inside his
tests/les_miserables.txt:1905:coarse shoes, and surmounted by a flat hat which allowed three golden
tests/les_miserables.txt:1908:It was a perfect festival wherever he appeared. One would have said
tests/les_miserables.txt:1909:that his presence had something warming and luminous about it. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:1910:children and the old people came out to the doorsteps for the Bishop as
tests/les_miserables.txt:1916:Here and there he halted, accosted the little boys and girls, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1918:money; when he no longer had any, he visited the rich.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1920:As he made his cassocks last a long while, and did not wish to have it
tests/les_miserables.txt:1921:noticed, he never went out in the town without his wadded purple cloak.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1922:This inconvenienced him somewhat in summer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1927:Magloire standing behind them and serving them at table. Nothing could
tests/les_miserables.txt:1929:curés to supper, Madame Magloire took advantage of the opportunity to
tests/les_miserables.txt:1930:serve Monseigneur with some excellent fish from the lake, or with some
tests/les_miserables.txt:1931:fine game from the mountains. Every curé furnished the pretext for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1932:good meal: the Bishop did not interfere. With that exception, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:1933:ordinary diet consisted only of vegetables boiled in water, and oil
tests/les_miserables.txt:1935:in the cheer of a curé, he indulges in the cheer of a trappist_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1937:After supper he conversed for half an hour with Mademoiselle Baptistine
tests/les_miserables.txt:1941:five or six very curious manuscripts; among others, a dissertation on
tests/les_miserables.txt:1943:upon the waters_. With this verse he compares three texts: the Arabic
tests/les_miserables.txt:1944:verse which says, _The winds of God blew;_ Flavius Josephus who says,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1945:_A wind from above was precipitated upon the earth;_ and finally, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1946:Chaldaic paraphrase of Onkelos, which renders it, _A wind coming from
tests/les_miserables.txt:1947:God blew upon the face of the waters_. In another dissertation, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:1948:examines the theological works of Hugo, Bishop of Ptolemaïs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1949:great-grand-uncle to the writer of this book, and establishes the fact,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1951:published during the last century, under the pseudonym of Barleycourt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:1954:be which he had in his hand, he would suddenly fall into a profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:1955:meditation, whence he only emerged to write a few lines on the pages of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1956:the volume itself. These lines have often no connection whatever with
tests/les_miserables.txt:1957:the book which contains them. We now have under our eyes a note written
tests/les_miserables.txt:1958:by him on the margin of a quarto entitled _Correspondence of Lord
tests/les_miserables.txt:1960:American station. Versailles, Poinçot, book-seller; and Paris, Pissot,
tests/les_miserables.txt:1967:“Ecclesiastes calls you the All-powerful; the Maccabees call you the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1968:Creator; the Epistle to the Ephesians calls you liberty; Baruch calls
tests/les_miserables.txt:1969:you Immensity; the Psalms call you Wisdom and Truth; John calls you
tests/les_miserables.txt:1970:Light; the Books of Kings call you Lord; Exodus calls you Providence;
tests/les_miserables.txt:1971:Leviticus, Sanctity; Esdras, Justice; the creation calls you God; man
tests/les_miserables.txt:1972:calls you Father; but Solomon calls you Compassion, and that is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1976:Toward nine o’clock in the evening the two women retired and betook
tests/les_miserables.txt:1977:themselves to their chambers on the first floor, leaving him alone
tests/les_miserables.txt:1980:It is necessary that we should, in this place, give an exact idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1989:The house in which he lived consisted, as we have said, of a ground
tests/les_miserables.txt:1991:chambers on the first, and an attic above. Behind the house was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1992:garden, a quarter of an acre in extent. The two women occupied the
tests/les_miserables.txt:1994:the street, served him as dining-room, the second was his bedroom, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:1996:except by passing through the bedroom, nor from the bedroom, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:1998:oratory, there was a detached alcove with a bed, for use in cases of
tests/les_miserables.txt:1999:hospitality. The Bishop offered this bed to country curates whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:2002:The pharmacy of the hospital, a small building which had been added to
tests/les_miserables.txt:2004:kitchen and cellar. In addition to this, there was in the garden a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2005:stable, which had formerly been the kitchen of the hospital, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:2006:which the Bishop kept two cows. No matter what the quantity of milk
tests/les_miserables.txt:2007:they gave, he invariably sent half of it every morning to the sick
tests/les_miserables.txt:2012:His bedroom was tolerably large, and rather difficult to warm in bad
tests/les_miserables.txt:2014:having a compartment of boards constructed in the cow-shed. Here he
tests/les_miserables.txt:2015:passed his evenings during seasons of severe cold: he called it his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2020:chairs. In addition to this the dining-room was ornamented with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:2021:antique sideboard, painted pink, in water colors. Out of a similar
tests/les_miserables.txt:2022:sideboard, properly draped with white napery and imitation lace, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2023:Bishop had constructed the altar which decorated his oratory.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2025:His wealthy penitents and the sainted women of D—— had more than once
tests/les_miserables.txt:2027:Monseigneur’s oratory; on each occasion he had taken the money and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:2029:soul of an unhappy creature consoled and thanking God.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2033:armchair, also in straw, in his bedroom. When, by chance, he received
tests/les_miserables.txt:2034:seven or eight persons at one time, the prefect, or the general, or the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2036:seminary, the chairs had to be fetched from the winter salon in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2037:stable, the prie-Dieu from the oratory, and the armchair from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2038:bedroom: in this way as many as eleven chairs could be collected for
tests/les_miserables.txt:2039:the visitors. A room was dismantled for each new guest.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2043:of the chimney if it was winter, or by strolling in the garden if it
tests/les_miserables.txt:2046:There was still another chair in the detached alcove, but the straw was
tests/les_miserables.txt:2047:half gone from it, and it had but three legs, so that it was of service
tests/les_miserables.txt:2049:her own room a very large easy-chair of wood, which had formerly been
tests/les_miserables.txt:2050:gilded, and which was covered with flowered pekin; but they had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:2052:as the staircase was too narrow; it could not, therefore, be reckoned
tests/les_miserables.txt:2055:Mademoiselle Baptistine’s ambition had been to be able to purchase a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2056:set of drawing-room furniture in yellow Utrecht velvet, stamped with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2057:rose pattern, and with mahogany in swan’s neck style, with a sofa. But
tests/les_miserables.txt:2058:this would have cost five hundred francs at least, and in view of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2059:fact that she had only been able to lay by forty-two francs and ten
tests/les_miserables.txt:2060:sous for this purpose in the course of five years, she had ended by
tests/les_miserables.txt:2061:renouncing the idea. However, who is there who has attained his ideal?
tests/les_miserables.txt:2064:bedchamber. A glazed door opened on the garden; opposite this was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2065:bed,—a hospital bed of iron, with a canopy of green serge; in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2066:shadow of the bed, behind a curtain, were the utensils of the toilet,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2067:which still betrayed the elegant habits of the man of the world: there
tests/les_miserables.txt:2068:were two doors, one near the chimney, opening into the oratory; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2069:other near the bookcase, opening into the dining-room. The bookcase was
tests/les_miserables.txt:2070:a large cupboard with glass doors filled with books; the chimney was of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2072:chimney stood a pair of firedogs of iron, ornamented above with two
tests/les_miserables.txt:2073:garlanded vases, and flutings which had formerly been silvered with
tests/les_miserables.txt:2074:silver leaf, which was a sort of episcopal luxury; above the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2075:chimney-piece hung a crucifix of copper, with the silver worn off,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2076:fixed on a background of threadbare velvet in a wooden frame from which
tests/les_miserables.txt:2078:inkstand, loaded with a confusion of papers and with huge volumes;
tests/les_miserables.txt:2079:before the table an armchair of straw; in front of the bed a prie-Dieu,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2082:Two portraits in oval frames were fastened to the wall on each side of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2083:the bed. Small gilt inscriptions on the plain surface of the cloth at
tests/les_miserables.txt:2084:the side of these figures indicated that the portraits represented, one
tests/les_miserables.txt:2086:Tourteau, vicar-general of Agde, abbé of Grand-Champ, order of Cîteaux,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2087:diocese of Chartres. When the Bishop succeeded to this apartment, after
tests/les_miserables.txt:2089:them. They were priests, and probably donors—two reasons for respecting
tests/les_miserables.txt:2091:appointed by the king, the one to his bishopric, the other to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2092:benefice, on the same day, the 27th of April, 1785. Madame Magloire
tests/les_miserables.txt:2093:having taken the pictures down to dust, the Bishop had discovered these
tests/les_miserables.txt:2094:particulars written in whitish ink on a little square of paper,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2095:yellowed by time, and attached to the back of the portrait of the Abbé
tests/les_miserables.txt:2098:At his window he had an antique curtain of a coarse woollen stuff,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2099:which finally became so old, that, in order to avoid the expense of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2100:new one, Madame Magloire was forced to take a large seam in the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:2101:middle of it. This seam took the form of a cross. The Bishop often
tests/les_miserables.txt:2102:called attention to it: “How delightful that is!” he said.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2104:All the rooms in the house, without exception, those on the ground
tests/les_miserables.txt:2105:floor as well as those on the first floor, were white-washed, which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:2106:a fashion in barracks and hospitals.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2108:However, in their latter years, Madame Magloire discovered beneath the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2109:paper which had been washed over, paintings, ornamenting the apartment
tests/les_miserables.txt:2110:of Mademoiselle Baptistine, as we shall see further on. Before becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:2111:a hospital, this house had been the ancient parliament house of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2112:Bourgeois. Hence this decoration. The chambers were paved in red
tests/les_miserables.txt:2113:bricks, which were washed every week, with straw mats in front of all
tests/les_miserables.txt:2114:the beds. Altogether, this dwelling, which was attended to by the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:2115:women, was exquisitely clean from top to bottom. This was the sole
tests/les_miserables.txt:2116:luxury which the Bishop permitted. He said, _“That takes nothing from
tests/les_miserables.txt:2119:It must be confessed, however, that he still retained from his former
tests/les_miserables.txt:2120:possessions six silver knives and forks and a soup-ladle, which Madame
tests/les_miserables.txt:2121:Magloire contemplated every day with delight, as they glistened
tests/les_miserables.txt:2122:splendidly upon the coarse linen cloth. And since we are now painting
tests/les_miserables.txt:2124:more than once, “I find it difficult to renounce eating from silver
tests/les_miserables.txt:2128:To this silverware must be added two large candlesticks of massive
tests/les_miserables.txt:2129:silver, which he had inherited from a great-aunt. These candlesticks
tests/les_miserables.txt:2130:held two wax candles, and usually figured on the Bishop’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:2131:chimney-piece. When he had any one to dinner, Madame Magloire lighted
tests/les_miserables.txt:2132:the two candles and set the candlesticks on the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2134:In the Bishop’s own chamber, at the head of his bed, there was a small
tests/les_miserables.txt:2135:cupboard, in which Madame Magloire locked up the six silver knives and
tests/les_miserables.txt:2136:forks and the big spoon every night. But it is necessary to add, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:2139:The garden, which had been rather spoiled by the ugly buildings which
tests/les_miserables.txt:2140:we have mentioned, was composed of four alleys in cross-form, radiating
tests/les_miserables.txt:2141:from a tank. Another walk made the circuit of the garden, and skirted
tests/les_miserables.txt:2142:the white wall which enclosed it. These alleys left behind them four
tests/les_miserables.txt:2144:cultivated vegetables; in the fourth, the Bishop had planted some
tests/les_miserables.txt:2146:once remarked, with a sort of gentle malice: “Monseigneur, you who turn
tests/les_miserables.txt:2147:everything to account, have, nevertheless, one useless plot. It would
tests/les_miserables.txt:2153:This plot, consisting of three or four beds, occupied the Bishop almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:2154:as much as did his books. He liked to pass an hour or two there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2156:which he dropped seeds. He was not as hostile to insects as a gardener
tests/les_miserables.txt:2157:could have wished to see him. Moreover, he made no pretensions to
tests/les_miserables.txt:2158:botany; he ignored groups and consistency; he made not the slightest
tests/les_miserables.txt:2159:effort to decide between Tournefort and the natural method; he took
tests/les_miserables.txt:2160:part neither with the buds against the cotyledons, nor with Jussieu
tests/les_miserables.txt:2162:respected learned men greatly; he respected the ignorant still more;
tests/les_miserables.txt:2163:and, without ever failing in these two respects, he watered his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2166:The house had not a single door which could be locked. The door of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2167:dining-room, which, as we have said, opened directly on the cathedral
tests/les_miserables.txt:2168:square, had formerly been ornamented with locks and bolts like the door
tests/les_miserables.txt:2171:except the latch. All that the first passer-by had to do at any hour,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2172:was to give it a push. At first, the two women had been very much tried
tests/les_miserables.txt:2173:by this door, which was never fastened, but Monsieur de D—— had said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:2175:ended by sharing his confidence, or by at least acting as though they
tests/les_miserables.txt:2177:the Bishop, his thought can be found explained, or at least indicated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2178:in the three lines which he wrote on the margin of a Bible, “This is
tests/les_miserables.txt:2179:the shade of difference: the door of the physician should never be
tests/les_miserables.txt:2183:On another book, entitled _Philosophy of the Medical Science_, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:2184:written this other note: “Am not I a physician like them? I also have
tests/les_miserables.txt:2185:my patients, and then, too, I have some whom I call my unfortunates.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2193:It chanced that a worthy curé, I know not whether it was the curé of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2194:Couloubroux or the curé of Pompierry, took it into his head to ask him
tests/les_miserables.txt:2196:Monsieur was sure that he was not committing an indiscretion, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2197:certain extent, in leaving his door unfastened day and night, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2198:mercy of any one who should choose to enter, and whether, in short, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:2199:did not fear lest some misfortune might occur in a house so little
tests/les_miserables.txt:2200:guarded. The Bishop touched his shoulder, with gentle gravity, and said
tests/les_miserables.txt:2201:to him, _“Nisi Dominus custodierit domum, in vanum vigilant qui
tests/les_miserables.txt:2202:custodiunt eam,” Unless the Lord guard the house, in vain do they watch
tests/les_miserables.txt:2208:bravery of a colonel of dragoons,—only,” he added, “ours must be
tests/les_miserables.txt:2218:It is here that a fact falls naturally into place, which we must not
tests/les_miserables.txt:2219:omit, because it is one of the sort which show us best what sort of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2222:After the destruction of the band of Gaspard Bès, who had infested the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2224:the mountains. He concealed himself for some time with his bandits, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2225:remnant of Gaspard Bès’s troop, in the county of Nice; then he made his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2226:way to Piédmont, and suddenly reappeared in France, in the vicinity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2227:Barcelonette. He was first seen at Jauziers, then at Tuiles. He hid
tests/les_miserables.txt:2228:himself in the caverns of the Joug-de-l’Aigle, and thence he descended
tests/les_miserables.txt:2232:He even pushed as far as Embrun, entered the cathedral one night, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:2233:despoiled the sacristy. His highway robberies laid waste the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2234:country-side. The gendarmes were set on his track, but in vain. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:2235:always escaped; sometimes he resisted by main force. He was a bold
tests/les_miserables.txt:2236:wretch. In the midst of all this terror the Bishop arrived. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:2237:making his circuit to Chastelar. The mayor came to meet him, and urged
tests/les_miserables.txt:2238:him to retrace his steps. Cravatte was in possession of the mountains
tests/les_miserables.txt:2239:as far as Arche, and beyond; there was danger even with an escort; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:2242:“Therefore,” said the Bishop, “I intend to go without escort.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2245:“You do not really mean that, Monseigneur!” exclaimed the mayor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2267:community no bigger than that, which I have not seen for three years.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2270:woollen cords of various colors, and they play the mountain airs on
tests/les_miserables.txt:2283:“But, Monseigneur, there is a band of them! A flock of wolves!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2286:“Monsieur le maire, it may be that it is of this very flock of wolves
tests/les_miserables.txt:2287:that Jesus has constituted me the shepherd. Who knows the ways of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2288:Providence?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2318:They had to allow him to do as he pleased. He set out, accompanied only
tests/les_miserables.txt:2319:by a child who offered to serve as a guide. His obstinacy was bruited
tests/les_miserables.txt:2320:about the country-side, and caused great consternation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2323:mountain on mule-back, encountered no one, and arrived safe and sound
tests/les_miserables.txt:2324:at the residence of his “good friends,” the shepherds. He remained
tests/les_miserables.txt:2325:there for a fortnight, preaching, administering the sacrament,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2326:teaching, exhorting. When the time of his departure approached, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:2327:resolved to chant a _Te Deum_ pontifically. He mentioned it to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2328:curé. But what was to be done? There were no episcopal ornaments. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:2329:could only place at his disposal a wretched village sacristy, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2330:few ancient chasubles of threadbare damask adorned with imitation lace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2332:“Bah!” said the Bishop. “Let us announce our _Te Deum_ from the pulpit,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2336:They instituted a search in the churches of the neighborhood. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2337:magnificence of these humble parishes combined would not have sufficed
tests/les_miserables.txt:2338:to clothe the chorister of a cathedral properly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2340:While they were thus embarrassed, a large chest was brought and
tests/les_miserables.txt:2342:who departed on the instant. The chest was opened; it contained a cope
tests/les_miserables.txt:2343:of cloth of gold, a mitre ornamented with diamonds, an archbishop’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:2344:cross, a magnificent crosier,—all the pontifical vestments which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:2346:d’Embrun. In the chest was a paper, on which these words were written,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2349:“Did not I say that things would come right of themselves?” said the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2350:Bishop. Then he added, with a smile, “To him who contents himself with
tests/les_miserables.txt:2351:the surplice of a curate, God sends the cope of an archbishop.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2354:“Monseigneur,” murmured the curé, throwing back his head with a smile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2358:The Bishop looked steadily at the curé, and repeated with authority,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2362:When he returned to Chastelar, the people came out to stare at him as
tests/les_miserables.txt:2363:at a curiosity, all along the road. At the priest’s house in Chastelar
tests/les_miserables.txt:2368:in God; I have brought back the treasure of a cathedral.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2373:Let us fear ourselves. Prejudices are the real robbers; vices are the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2375:what threatens our head or our purse! Let us think only of that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:2379:Then, turning to his sister: “Sister, never a precaution on the part of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2380:the priest, against his fellow-man. That which his fellow does, God
tests/les_miserables.txt:2381:permits. Let us confine ourselves to prayer, when we think that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2382:danger is approaching us. Let us pray, not for ourselves, but that our
tests/les_miserables.txt:2383:brother may not fall into sin on our account.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2386:However, such incidents were rare in his life. We relate those of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:2390:As to what became of “the treasure” of the cathedral of Embrun, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:2391:should be embarrassed by any inquiry in that direction. It consisted of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2392:very handsome things, very tempting things, and things which were very
tests/les_miserables.txt:2394:they had already been elsewhere. Half of the adventure was completed;
tests/les_miserables.txt:2395:it only remained to impart a new direction to the theft, and to cause
tests/les_miserables.txt:2396:it to take a short trip in the direction of the poor. However, we make
tests/les_miserables.txt:2397:no assertions on this point. Only, a rather obscure note was found
tests/les_miserables.txt:2398:among the Bishop’s papers, which may bear some relation to this matter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2399:and which is couched in these terms, _“The question is, to decide
tests/les_miserables.txt:2400:whether this should be turned over to the cathedral or to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2409:The senator above mentioned was a clever man, who had made his own way,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2410:heedless of those things which present obstacles, and which are called
tests/les_miserables.txt:2411:conscience, sworn faith, justice, duty: he had marched straight to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2412:goal, without once flinching in the line of his advancement and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2413:interest. He was an old attorney, softened by success; not a bad man by
tests/les_miserables.txt:2414:any means, who rendered all the small services in his power to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2418:intelligent, and just sufficiently educated to think himself a disciple
tests/les_miserables.txt:2419:of Epicurus; while he was, in reality, only a product of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2421:eternal things, and at the “crotchets of that good old fellow the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2423:the presence of M. Myriel himself, who listened to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2425:On some semi-official occasion or other, I do not recollect what,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2426:Count*** [this senator] and M. Myriel were to dine with the prefect. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:2428:perfectly dignified, exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:2430:“Egad, Bishop, let’s have a discussion. It is hard for a senator and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2431:bishop to look at each other without winking. We are two augurs. I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:2432:going to make a confession to you. I have a philosophy of my own.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2439:The senator was encouraged, and went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:2446:“I declare to you,” continued the senator, “that the Marquis d’Argens,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2447:Pyrrhon, Hobbes, and M. Naigeon are no rascals. I have all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2455:“I hate Diderot; he is an ideologist, a declaimer, and a revolutionist,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2462:nothing but to produce shallow people, whose reasoning is hollow. Down
tests/les_miserables.txt:2463:with that great All, which torments me! Hurrah for Zero which leaves me
tests/les_miserables.txt:2464:in peace! Between you and me, and in order to empty my sack, and make
tests/les_miserables.txt:2465:confession to my pastor, as it behooves me to do, I will admit to you
tests/les_miserables.txt:2466:that I have good sense. I am not enthusiastic over your Jesus, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:2467:preaches renunciation and sacrifice to the last extremity. ’Tis the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2468:counsel of an avaricious man to beggars. Renunciation; why? Sacrifice;
tests/les_miserables.txt:2470:of another wolf. Let us stick to nature, then. We are at the top; let
tests/les_miserables.txt:2475:sacrifice and renunciation are recommended to me; I must take heed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:2476:everything I do; I must cudgel my brains over good and evil, over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2477:just and the unjust, over the _fas_ and the _nefas_. Why? Because I
tests/les_miserables.txt:2478:shall have to render an account of my actions. When? After death. What
tests/les_miserables.txt:2479:a fine dream! After my death it will be a very clever person who can
tests/les_miserables.txt:2480:catch me. Have a handful of dust seized by a shadow-hand, if you can.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2482:veil of Isis: there is no such thing as either good or evil; there is
tests/les_miserables.txt:2484:us go into it thoroughly. What the deuce! let us go to the bottom of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2485:it! We must scent out the truth; dig in the earth for it, and seize it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2487:I am square on the bottom, I am. Immortality, Bishop, is a chance, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2488:waiting for dead men’s shoes. Ah! what a charming promise! trust to it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2490:angels, with blue wings on our shoulder-blades. Do come to my
tests/les_miserables.txt:2491:assistance: is it not Tertullian who says that the blessed shall travel
tests/les_miserables.txt:2494:all these paradises are! God is a nonsensical monster. I would not say
tests/les_miserables.txt:2496:_Inter pocula_. To sacrifice the world to paradise is to let slip the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2497:prey for the shadow. Be the dupe of the infinite! I’m not such a fool.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2498:I am a nought. I call myself Monsieur le Comte Nought, senator. Did I
tests/les_miserables.txt:2500:little dust collected in an organism. What am I to do on this earth?
tests/les_miserables.txt:2501:The choice rests with me: suffer or enjoy. Whither will suffering lead
tests/les_miserables.txt:2503:lead me? To nothingness; but I shall have enjoyed myself. My choice is
tests/les_miserables.txt:2505:tooth than the grass. Such is my wisdom. After which, go whither I push
tests/les_miserables.txt:2509:there being any one who has anything to tell me on that subject. Fables
tests/les_miserables.txt:2510:of nurses; bugaboo for children; Jehovah for men. No; our to-morrow is
tests/les_miserables.txt:2512:have been Sardanapalus, you have been Vincent de Paul—it makes no
tests/les_miserables.txt:2513:difference. That is the truth. Then live your life, above all things.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2516:let myself be taken in with that nonsense. Of course, there must be
tests/les_miserables.txt:2518:knife-grinders, and miserable wretches. Legends, chimæras, the soul,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2521:nothing else has the good God. That is the least he can have. I oppose
tests/les_miserables.txt:2522:no objection to that; but I reserve Monsieur Naigeon for myself. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:2523:good God is good for the populace.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2526:The Bishop clapped his hands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2528:“That’s talking!” he exclaimed. “What an excellent and really
tests/les_miserables.txt:2529:marvellous thing is this materialism! Not every one who wants it can
tests/les_miserables.txt:2532:Stephen, nor burned alive like Jeanne d’Arc. Those who have succeeded
tests/les_miserables.txt:2533:in procuring this admirable materialism have the joy of feeling
tests/les_miserables.txt:2534:themselves irresponsible, and of thinking that they can devour
tests/les_miserables.txt:2535:everything without uneasiness,—places, sinecures, dignities, power,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2536:whether well or ill acquired, lucrative recantations, useful
tests/les_miserables.txt:2537:treacheries, savory capitulations of conscience,—and that they shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:2538:enter the tomb with their digestion accomplished. How agreeable that
tests/les_miserables.txt:2539:is! I do not say that with reference to you, senator. Nevertheless, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:2540:is impossible for me to refrain from congratulating you. You great
tests/les_miserables.txt:2542:which is exquisite, refined, accessible to the rich alone, good for all
tests/les_miserables.txt:2543:sauces, and which seasons the voluptuousness of life admirably. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:2544:philosophy has been extracted from the depths, and unearthed by special
tests/les_miserables.txt:2545:seekers. But you are good-natured princes, and you do not think it a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2546:bad thing that belief in the good God should constitute the philosophy
tests/les_miserables.txt:2547:of the people, very much as the goose stuffed with chestnuts is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2558:of D——, and of the manner in which those two sainted women subordinated
tests/les_miserables.txt:2559:their actions, their thoughts, their feminine instincts even, which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:2561:even taking the trouble of speaking in order to explain them, we cannot
tests/les_miserables.txt:2562:do better than transcribe in this place a letter from Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:2563:Baptistine to Madame the Vicomtess de Boischevron, the friend of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:2564:childhood. This letter is in our possession.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2566:D——, Dec. 16, 18—. MY GOOD MADAM: Not a day passes without our speaking
tests/les_miserables.txt:2567:of you. It is our established custom; but there is another reason
tests/les_miserables.txt:2568:besides. Just imagine, while washing and dusting the ceilings and
tests/les_miserables.txt:2569:walls, Madam Magloire has made some discoveries; now our two chambers
tests/les_miserables.txt:2570:hung with antique paper whitewashed over, would not discredit a château
tests/les_miserables.txt:2572:There were things beneath. My drawing-room, which contains no
tests/les_miserables.txt:2573:furniture, and which we use for spreading out the linen after washing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2574:is fifteen feet in height, eighteen square, with a ceiling which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:2576:covered with a cloth while this was the hospital. And the woodwork was
tests/les_miserables.txt:2578:see. Madam Magloire has discovered, under at least ten thicknesses of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2579:paper pasted on top, some paintings, which without being good are very
tests/les_miserables.txt:2580:tolerable. The subject is Telemachus being knighted by Minerva in some
tests/les_miserables.txt:2581:gardens, the name of which escapes me. In short, where the Roman ladies
tests/les_miserables.txt:2583:and Roman ladies [here occurs an illegible word], and the whole train.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2584:Madam Magloire has cleaned it all off; this summer she is going to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:2585:some small injuries repaired, and the whole revarnished, and my chamber
tests/les_miserables.txt:2586:will be a regular museum. She has also found in a corner of the attic
tests/les_miserables.txt:2587:two wooden pier-tables of ancient fashion. They asked us two crowns of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2588:six francs each to regild them, but it is much better to give the money
tests/les_miserables.txt:2589:to the poor; and they are very ugly besides, and I should much prefer a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2593:the poor and sick. We are very much cramped. The country is trying in
tests/les_miserables.txt:2595:We are almost comfortably lighted and warmed. You see that these are
tests/les_miserables.txt:2600:Whoever chooses to enter finds himself at once in my brother’s room. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:2605:us even seem to notice it. One must know how to understand him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2608:He fears neither suspicious roads nor dangerous encounters, nor night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2610:Last year he went quite alone into a country of robbers. He would not
tests/les_miserables.txt:2612:happened to him; he was thought to be dead, but was perfectly well, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:2614:full of jewels, all the jewels of the cathedral of Embrun, which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2617:When he returned on that occasion, I could not refrain from scolding
tests/les_miserables.txt:2618:him a little, taking care, however, not to speak except when the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2619:carriage was making a noise, so that no one might hear me.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2621:At first I used to say to myself, “There are no dangers which will stop
tests/les_miserables.txt:2624:as he sees fit. I carry off Madam Magloire, I enter my chamber, I pray
tests/les_miserables.txt:2625:for him and fall asleep. I am at ease, because I know that if anything
tests/les_miserables.txt:2627:good God with my brother and my bishop. It has cost Madam Magloire more
tests/les_miserables.txt:2628:trouble than it did me to accustom herself to what she terms his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2629:imprudences. But now the habit has been acquired. We pray together, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:2635:This suffices me. My brother has no longer any need of saying a word to
tests/les_miserables.txt:2637:the care of Providence. That is the way one has to do with a man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:2640:I have interrogated my brother with regard to the information which you
tests/les_miserables.txt:2641:desire on the subject of the Faux family. You are aware that he knows
tests/les_miserables.txt:2642:everything, and that he has memories, because he is still a very good
tests/les_miserables.txt:2643:royalist. They really are a very ancient Norman family of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2646:whom was a seigneur de Rochefort. The last was Guy-Étienne-Alexandre,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2647:and was commander of a regiment, and something in the light horse of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2649:Gramont, son of the Duke Louis de Gramont, peer of France, colonel of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2650:the French guards, and lieutenant-general of the army. It is written
tests/les_miserables.txt:2651:Faux, Fauq, and Faoucq.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2653:Good Madame, recommend us to the prayers of your sainted relative,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2655:not wasting the few moments which she passes with you in writing to me.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2658:That is all that I desire. The souvenir which she sent through you
tests/les_miserables.txt:2659:reached me safely, and it makes me very happy. My health is not so very
tests/les_miserables.txt:2661:and this forces me to leave you. A thousand good wishes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2665:P.S. Your grand nephew is charming. Do you know that he will soon be
tests/les_miserables.txt:2666:five years old? Yesterday he saw some one riding by on horseback who
tests/les_miserables.txt:2667:had on knee-caps, and he said, “What has he got on his knees?” He is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2668:charming child! His little brother is dragging an old broom about the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2669:room, like a carriage, and saying, “Hu!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2672:As will be perceived from this letter, these two women understood how
tests/les_miserables.txt:2673:to mould themselves to the Bishop’s ways with that special feminine
tests/les_miserables.txt:2674:genius which comprehends the man better than he comprehends himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2675:The Bishop of D——, in spite of the gentle and candid air which never
tests/les_miserables.txt:2677:magnificent, without seeming to have even a suspicion of the fact. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:2679:remonstrance in advance, but never at the time, nor afterwards. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:2680:never interfered with him by so much as a word or sign, in any action
tests/les_miserables.txt:2681:once entered upon. At certain moments, without his having occasion to
tests/les_miserables.txt:2682:mention it, when he was not even conscious of it himself in all
tests/les_miserables.txt:2683:probability, so perfect was his simplicity, they vaguely felt that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:2684:was acting as a bishop; then they were nothing more than two shadows in
tests/les_miserables.txt:2685:the house. They served him passively; and if obedience consisted in
tests/les_miserables.txt:2687:delicacy of instinct, that certain cares may be put under constraint.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2689:not say his thought, but his nature, to such a degree that they no
tests/les_miserables.txt:2690:longer watched over him. They confided him to God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2701:At an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2702:preceding pages, he did a thing which, if the whole town was to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:2703:believed, was even more hazardous than his trip across the mountains
tests/les_miserables.txt:2706:In the country near D—— a man lived quite alone. This man, we will
tests/les_miserables.txt:2707:state at once, was a former member of the Convention. His name was G——
tests/les_miserables.txt:2710:the little world of D—— A member of the Convention—can you imagine such
tests/les_miserables.txt:2711:a thing? That existed from the time when people called each other
tests/les_miserables.txt:2712:_thou_, and when they said “citizen.” This man was almost a monster. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:2714:quasi-regicide. He had been a terrible man. How did it happen that such
tests/les_miserables.txt:2715:a man had not been brought before a provost’s court, on the return of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2716:the legitimate princes? They need not have cut off his head, if you
tests/les_miserables.txt:2717:please; clemency must be exercised, agreed; but a good banishment for
tests/les_miserables.txt:2718:life. An example, in short, etc. Besides, he was an atheist, like all
tests/les_miserables.txt:2722:element of ferocity in this solitude of his. As he had not voted for
tests/les_miserables.txt:2723:the death of the king, he had not been included in the decrees of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2724:exile, and had been able to remain in France.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2726:He dwelt at a distance of three-quarters of an hour from the city, far
tests/les_miserables.txt:2728:valley, no one knew exactly where. He had there, it was said, a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2730:Since he had dwelt in that valley, the path which led thither had
tests/les_miserables.txt:2731:disappeared under a growth of grass. The locality was spoken of as
tests/les_miserables.txt:2734:Nevertheless, the Bishop meditated on the subject, and from time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:2735:time he gazed at the horizon at a point where a clump of trees marked
tests/les_miserables.txt:2737:is a soul yonder which is lonely.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2743:But, let us avow it, this idea, which seemed natural at the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:2744:blush, appeared to him after a moment’s reflection, as strange,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2747:his being clearly conscious of the fact himself, with that sentiment
tests/les_miserables.txt:2748:which borders on hate, and which is so well expressed by the word
tests/les_miserables.txt:2751:Still, should the scab of the sheep cause the shepherd to recoil? No.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2754:The good Bishop was perplexed. Sometimes he set out in that direction;
tests/les_miserables.txt:2759:come in quest of a doctor; that the old wretch was dying, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:2763:The Bishop took his staff, put on his cloak, on account of his too
tests/les_miserables.txt:2764:threadbare cassock, as we have mentioned, and because of the evening
tests/les_miserables.txt:2765:breeze which was sure to rise soon, and set out.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2767:The sun was setting, and had almost touched the horizon when the Bishop
tests/les_miserables.txt:2768:arrived at the excommunicated spot. With a certain beating of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2769:heart, he recognized the fact that he was near the lair. He strode over
tests/les_miserables.txt:2770:a ditch, leaped a hedge, made his way through a fence of dead boughs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2771:entered a neglected paddock, took a few steps with a good deal of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2773:lofty brambles, he caught sight of the cavern.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2775:It was a very low hut, poor, small, and clean, with a vine nailed
tests/les_miserables.txt:2778:Near the door, in an old wheel-chair, the armchair of the peasants,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2784:While the Bishop was watching him, the old man spoke: “Thank you,” he
tests/les_miserables.txt:2786:child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2788:The Bishop stepped forward. At the sound which he made in walking, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2789:old man turned his head, and his face expressed the sum total of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2790:surprise which a man can still feel after a long life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2792:“This is the first time since I have been here,” said he, “that any one
tests/les_miserables.txt:2802:people call Monseigneur Welcome?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2810:“In that case, you are my bishop?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2820:Bishop did not take it. The Bishop confined himself to the remark:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:2822:“I am pleased to see that I have been misinformed. You certainly do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:2826:“Monsieur,” replied the old man, “I am going to recover.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2831:“I shall die three hours hence.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2834:Then he continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:2836:“I am something of a doctor; I know in what fashion the last hour draws
tests/les_miserables.txt:2837:on. Yesterday, only my feet were cold; to-day, the chill has ascended
tests/les_miserables.txt:2838:to my knees; now I feel it mounting to my waist; when it reaches the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2840:wheeled out here to take a last look at things. You can talk to me; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:2841:does not fatigue me. You have done well to come and look at a man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:2843:that moment. One has one’s caprices; I should have liked to last until
tests/les_miserables.txt:2855:The child entered the hut.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2863:The Bishop was not touched as it seems that he should have been. He did
tests/les_miserables.txt:2864:not think he discerned God in this manner of dying; let us say the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2865:whole, for these petty contradictions of great hearts must be indicated
tests/les_miserables.txt:2866:like the rest: he, who on occasion, was so fond of laughing at “His
tests/les_miserables.txt:2867:Grace,” was rather shocked at not being addressed as Monseigneur, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:2868:he was almost tempted to retort “citizen.” He was assailed by a fancy
tests/les_miserables.txt:2869:for peevish familiarity, common enough to doctors and priests, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:2870:which was not habitual with him. This man, after all, this member of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2876:modest cordiality, in which one could have distinguished, possibly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2877:that humility which is so fitting when one is on the verge of returning
tests/les_miserables.txt:2881:curiosity, which, in his opinion, bordered on a fault, could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:2883:which, as it did not have its course in sympathy, would have served his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2884:conscience as a matter of reproach, in connection with any other man. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:2885:member of the Convention produced on him somewhat the effect of being
tests/les_miserables.txt:2886:outside the pale of the law, even of the law of charity. G——, calm, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:2887:body almost upright, his voice vibrating, was one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:2888:octogenarians who form the subject of astonishment to the physiologist.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2889:The Revolution had many of these men, proportioned to the epoch. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:2890:this old man one was conscious of a man put to the proof. Though so
tests/les_miserables.txt:2891:near to his end, he preserved all the gestures of health. In his clear
tests/les_miserables.txt:2892:glance, in his firm tone, in the robust movement of his shoulders,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2893:there was something calculated to disconcert death. Azrael, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2894:Mohammedan angel of the sepulchre, would have turned back, and thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:2895:that he had mistaken the door. G—— seemed to be dying because he willed
tests/les_miserables.txt:2897:It was there that the shadows held him fast. His feet were cold and
tests/les_miserables.txt:2904:“I congratulate you,” said he, in the tone which one uses for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2908:The old member of the Convention did not appear to notice the bitter
tests/les_miserables.txt:2910:quite disappeared from his face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2912:“Do not congratulate me too much, sir. I did vote for the death of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2920:“I mean to say that man has a tyrant,—ignorance. I voted for the death
tests/les_miserables.txt:2921:of that tyrant. That tyrant engendered royalty, which is authority
tests/les_miserables.txt:2922:falsely understood, while science is authority rightly understood. Man
tests/les_miserables.txt:2923:should be governed only by science.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2926:“And conscience,” added the Bishop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2928:“It is the same thing. Conscience is the quantity of innate science
tests/les_miserables.txt:2929:which we have within us.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2933:which was very new to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:2937:“So far as Louis XVI. was concerned, I said ‘no.’ I did not think that
tests/les_miserables.txt:2941:for the child. In voting for the Republic, I voted for that. I voted
tests/les_miserables.txt:2942:for fraternity, concord, the dawn. I have aided in the overthrow of
tests/les_miserables.txt:2943:prejudices and errors. The crumbling away of prejudices and errors
tests/les_miserables.txt:2944:causes light. We have caused the fall of the old world, and the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:2945:world, that vase of miseries, has become, through its upsetting upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:2946:the human race, an urn of joy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2952:past, which is called 1814, joy which has disappeared! Alas! The work
tests/les_miserables.txt:2953:was incomplete, I admit: we demolished the ancient regime in deeds; we
tests/les_miserables.txt:2955:not sufficient; customs must be modified. The mill is there no longer;
tests/les_miserables.txt:2960:demolition complicated with wrath.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2964:progress. In any case, and in spite of whatever may be said, the French
tests/les_miserables.txt:2965:Revolution is the most important step of the human race since the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2966:advent of Christ. Incomplete, it may be, but sublime. It set free all
tests/les_miserables.txt:2967:the unknown social quantities; it softened spirits, it calmed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:2968:appeased, enlightened; it caused the waves of civilization to flow over
tests/les_miserables.txt:2969:the earth. It was a good thing. The French Revolution is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2970:consecration of humanity.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:2973:The Bishop could not refrain from murmuring:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:2978:The member of the Convention straightened himself up in his chair with
tests/les_miserables.txt:2979:an almost lugubrious solemnity, and exclaimed, so far as a dying man is
tests/les_miserables.txt:2980:capable of exclamation:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:2982:“Ah, there you go; ’93! I was expecting that word. A cloud had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:2983:forming for the space of fifteen hundred years; at the end of fifteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:2987:The Bishop felt, without, perhaps, confessing it, that something within
tests/les_miserables.txt:2988:him had suffered extinction. Nevertheless, he put a good face on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2991:“The judge speaks in the name of justice; the priest speaks in the name
tests/les_miserables.txt:2992:of pity, which is nothing but a more lofty justice. A thunderbolt
tests/les_miserables.txt:2993:should commit no error.” And he added, regarding the member of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:2997:The conventionary stretched forth his hand and grasped the Bishop’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:3000:“Louis XVII.! let us see. For whom do you mourn? is it for the innocent
tests/les_miserables.txt:3001:child? very good; in that case I mourn with you. Is it for the royal
tests/les_miserables.txt:3002:child? I demand time for reflection. To me, the brother of Cartouche,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3003:an innocent child who was hung up by the armpits in the Place de Grève,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3004:until death ensued, for the sole crime of having been the brother of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3005:Cartouche, is no less painful than the grandson of Louis XV., an
tests/les_miserables.txt:3006:innocent child, martyred in the tower of the Temple, for the sole crime
tests/les_miserables.txt:3010:“Monsieur,” said the Bishop, “I like not this conjunction of names.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3013:“Cartouche? Louis XV.? To which of the two do you object?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3016:A momentary silence ensued. The Bishop almost regretted having come,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3019:The conventionary resumed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:3021:“Ah, Monsieur Priest, you love not the crudities of the true. Christ
tests/les_miserables.txt:3022:loved them. He seized a rod and cleared out the Temple. His scourge,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3023:full of lightnings, was a harsh speaker of truths. When he cried,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3024:_‘Sinite parvulos,’_ he made no distinction between the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:3025:children. It would not have embarrassed him to bring together the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3026:Dauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod. Innocence, Monsieur, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3027:its own crown. Innocence has no need to be a highness. It is as august
tests/les_miserables.txt:3031:“That is true,” said the Bishop in a low voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3033:“I persist,” continued the conventionary G—— “You have mentioned Louis
tests/les_miserables.txt:3034:XVII. to me. Let us come to an understanding. Shall we weep for all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3035:innocent, all martyrs, all children, the lowly as well as the exalted?
tests/les_miserables.txt:3036:I agree to that. But in that case, as I have told you, we must go back
tests/les_miserables.txt:3038:weep with you over the children of kings, provided that you will weep
tests/les_miserables.txt:3039:with me over the children of the people.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3044:“Equally!” exclaimed conventionary G——; “and if the balance must
tests/les_miserables.txt:3045:incline, let it be on the side of the people. They have been suffering
tests/les_miserables.txt:3049:Another silence ensued. The conventionary was the first to break it. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:3050:raised himself on one elbow, took a bit of his cheek between his thumb
tests/les_miserables.txt:3051:and his forefinger, as one does mechanically when one interrogates and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3052:judges, and appealed to the Bishop with a gaze full of all the forces
tests/les_miserables.txt:3057:about Louis XVII.? I know you not. Ever since I have been in these
tests/les_miserables.txt:3058:parts I have dwelt in this enclosure alone, never setting foot outside,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3059:and seeing no one but that child who helps me. Your name has reached me
tests/les_miserables.txt:3060:in a confused manner, it is true, and very badly pronounced, I must
tests/les_miserables.txt:3061:admit; but that signifies nothing: clever men have so many ways of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3063:the sound of your carriage; you have left it yonder, behind the coppice
tests/les_miserables.txt:3067:question. Who are you? You are a bishop; that is to say, a prince of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3068:the church, one of those gilded men with heraldic bearings and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3069:revenues, who have vast prebends,—the bishopric of D—— fifteen thousand
tests/les_miserables.txt:3070:francs settled income, ten thousand in perquisites; total, twenty-five
tests/les_miserables.txt:3071:thousand francs,—who have kitchens, who have liveries, who make good
tests/les_miserables.txt:3072:cheer, who eat moor-hens on Friday, who strut about, a lackey before, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3073:lackey behind, in a gala coach, and who have palaces, and who roll in
tests/les_miserables.txt:3074:their carriages in the name of Jesus Christ who went barefoot! You are
tests/les_miserables.txt:3075:a prelate,—revenues, palace, horses, servants, good table, all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3077:you enjoy it; it is well; but this says either too much or too little;
tests/les_miserables.txt:3078:this does not enlighten me upon the intrinsic and essential value of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3079:the man who comes with the probable intention of bringing wisdom to me.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3086:“A worm of the earth in a carriage?” growled the conventionary.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3088:It was the conventionary’s turn to be arrogant, and the Bishop’s to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:3093:“So be it, sir. But explain to me how my carriage, which is a few paces
tests/les_miserables.txt:3094:off behind the trees yonder, how my good table and the moor-hens which
tests/les_miserables.txt:3095:I eat on Friday, how my twenty-five thousand francs income, how my
tests/les_miserables.txt:3096:palace and my lackeys prove that clemency is not a duty, and that ’93
tests/les_miserables.txt:3100:The conventionary passed his hand across his brow, as though to sweep
tests/les_miserables.txt:3101:away a cloud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3103:“Before replying to you,” he said, “I beseech you to pardon me. I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:3104:just committed a wrong, sir. You are at my house, you are my guest, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:3105:owe you courtesy. You discuss my ideas, and it becomes me to confine
tests/les_miserables.txt:3106:myself to combating your arguments. Your riches and your pleasures are
tests/les_miserables.txt:3107:advantages which I hold over you in the debate; but good taste dictates
tests/les_miserables.txt:3116:“Let us return to the explanation which you have asked of me. Where
tests/les_miserables.txt:3120:“Inexorable; yes,” said the Bishop. “What think you of Marat clapping
tests/les_miserables.txt:3124:“What think you of Bossuet chanting the _Te Deum_ over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3129:directness of a point of steel. The Bishop quivered under it; no reply
tests/les_miserables.txt:3130:occurred to him; but he was offended by this mode of alluding to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3131:Bossuet. The best of minds will have their fetiches, and they sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:3132:feel vaguely wounded by the want of respect of logic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3134:The conventionary began to pant; the asthma of the agony which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3135:mingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice; still, there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3136:perfect lucidity of soul in his eyes. He went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:3138:“Let me say a few words more in this and that direction; I am willing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3139:Apart from the Revolution, which, taken as a whole, is an immense human
tests/les_miserables.txt:3141:but what of the whole monarchy, sir? Carrier is a bandit; but what name
tests/les_miserables.txt:3142:do you give to Montrevel? Fouquier-Tainville is a rascal; but what is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3144:Saulx-Tavannes, if you please? Duchêne senior is ferocious; but what
tests/les_miserables.txt:3147:sir, I am sorry for Marie Antoinette, archduchess and queen; but I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:3150:to a stake, and the child kept at a distance; her breast swelled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:3152:beheld that breast and cried and agonized; the executioner said to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3153:woman, a mother and a nurse, ‘Abjure!’ giving her her choice between
tests/les_miserables.txt:3154:the death of her infant and the death of her conscience. What say you
tests/les_miserables.txt:3156:mind sir: the French Revolution had its reasons for existence; its
tests/les_miserables.txt:3158:better. From its most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3159:human race. I abridge, I stop, I have too much the advantage; moreover,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3163:And ceasing to gaze at the Bishop, the conventionary concluded his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3166:“Yes, the brutalities of progress are called revolutions. When they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:3167:over, this fact is recognized,—that the human race has been treated
tests/les_miserables.txt:3171:The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered all
tests/les_miserables.txt:3172:the inmost intrenchments of the Bishop. One remained, however, and from
tests/les_miserables.txt:3173:this intrenchment, the last resource of Monseigneur Bienvenu’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:3174:resistance, came forth this reply, wherein appeared nearly all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3177:“Progress should believe in God. Good cannot have an impious servitor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3178:He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3182:with a fit of trembling. He looked towards heaven, and in his glance a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3183:tear gathered slowly. When the eyelid was full, the tear trickled down
tests/les_miserables.txt:3184:his livid cheek, and he said, almost in a stammer, quite low, and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3190:The Bishop experienced an indescribable shock.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3200:The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice, and with
tests/les_miserables.txt:3201:the shiver of ecstasy, as though he beheld some one. When he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:3202:spoken, his eyes closed. The effort had exhausted him. It was evident
tests/les_miserables.txt:3203:that he had just lived through in a moment the few hours which had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:3204:left to him. That which he had said brought him nearer to him who is in
tests/les_miserables.txt:3205:death. The supreme moment was approaching.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3208:had come: from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to extreme
tests/les_miserables.txt:3209:emotion; he gazed at those closed eyes, he took that wrinkled, aged and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3210:ice-cold hand in his, and bent over the dying man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3216:The conventionary opened his eyes again. A gravity mingled with gloom
tests/les_miserables.txt:3217:was imprinted on his countenance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3219:“Bishop,” said he, with a slowness which probably arose more from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3221:my life in meditation, study, and contemplation. I was sixty years of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3222:age when my country called me and commanded me to concern myself with
tests/les_miserables.txt:3223:its affairs. I obeyed. Abuses existed, I combated them; tyrannies
tests/les_miserables.txt:3224:existed, I destroyed them; rights and principles existed, I proclaimed
tests/les_miserables.txt:3225:and confessed them. Our territory was invaded, I defended it; France
tests/les_miserables.txt:3226:was menaced, I offered my breast. I was not rich; I am poor. I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:3228:encumbered with specie to such a degree that we were forced to shore up
tests/les_miserables.txt:3229:the walls, which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3231:have succored the oppressed, I have comforted the suffering. I tore the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3232:cloth from the altar, it is true; but it was to bind up the wounds of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3233:my country. I have always upheld the march forward of the human race,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3235:without pity. I have, when the occasion offered, protected my own
tests/les_miserables.txt:3238:palace, a convent of Urbanists, the Abbey of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3239:which I saved in 1793. I have done my duty according to my powers, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3240:all the good that I was able. After which, I was hunted down, pursued,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3241:persecuted, blackened, jeered at, scorned, cursed, proscribed. For many
tests/les_miserables.txt:3242:years past, I with my white hair have been conscious that many people
tests/les_miserables.txt:3244:present the visage of one damned. And I accept this isolation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3246:am on the point of death. What is it that you have come to ask of me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3253:When the Bishop raised his head again, the face of the conventionary
tests/les_miserables.txt:3254:had become august. He had just expired.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3256:The Bishop returned home, deeply absorbed in thoughts which cannot be
tests/les_miserables.txt:3258:morning some bold and curious persons attempted to speak to him about
tests/les_miserables.txt:3259:member of the Convention G——; he contented himself with pointing
tests/les_miserables.txt:3263:towards all children and sufferers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3265:Any allusion to “that old wretch of a G——” caused him to fall into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3266:singular preoccupation. No one could say that the passage of that soul
tests/les_miserables.txt:3267:before his, and the reflection of that grand conscience upon his, did
tests/les_miserables.txt:3268:not count for something in his approach to perfection.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3270:This “pastoral visit” naturally furnished an occasion for a murmur of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3271:comment in all the little local coteries.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3273:“Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3274:bishop? There was evidently no conversion to be expected. All those
tests/les_miserables.txt:3275:revolutionists are backsliders. Then why go there? What was there to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:3276:seen there? He must have been very curious indeed to see a soul carried
tests/les_miserables.txt:3282:inquiring when Your Greatness will receive the red cap!”—“Oh! oh!
tests/les_miserables.txt:3283:that’s a coarse color,” replied the Bishop. “It is lucky that those who
tests/les_miserables.txt:3284:despise it in a cap revere it in a hat.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3293:We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves, were we to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3294:conclude from this that Monseigneur Welcome was “a philosophical
tests/les_miserables.txt:3295:bishop,” or a “patriotic curé.” His meeting, which may almost be
tests/les_miserables.txt:3296:designated as his union, with conventionary G——, left behind it in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3297:mind a sort of astonishment, which rendered him still more gentle. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:3300:Although Monseigneur Bienvenu was far from being a politician, this is,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3301:perhaps, the place to indicate very briefly what his attitude was in
tests/les_miserables.txt:3302:the events of that epoch, supposing that Monseigneur Bienvenu ever
tests/les_miserables.txt:3305:Let us, then, go back a few years.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3307:Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3308:Emperor had made him a baron of the Empire, in company with many other
tests/les_miserables.txt:3309:bishops. The arrest of the Pope took place, as every one knows, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3310:night of the 5th to the 6th of July, 1809; on this occasion, M. Myriel
tests/les_miserables.txt:3311:was summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops of France and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3312:Italy convened at Paris. This synod was held at Notre-Dame, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3314:presidency of Cardinal Fesch. M. Myriel was one of the ninety-five
tests/les_miserables.txt:3316:three or four private conferences. Bishop of a mountain diocese, living
tests/les_miserables.txt:3317:so very close to nature, in rusticity and deprivation, it appeared that
tests/les_miserables.txt:3318:he imported among these eminent personages, ideas which altered the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3321:them. The outside air penetrated to them through me. I produced on them
tests/les_miserables.txt:3322:the effect of an open door.”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:3324:On another occasion he said, _“What would you have? Those gentlemen are
tests/les_miserables.txt:3325:princes. I am only a poor peasant bishop.”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:3327:The fact is that he displeased them. Among other strange things, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3328:said that he chanced to remark one evening, when he found himself at
tests/les_miserables.txt:3329:the house of one of his most notable colleagues: “What beautiful
tests/les_miserables.txt:3330:clocks! What beautiful carpets! What beautiful liveries! They must be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3331:great trouble. I would not have all those superfluities, crying
tests/les_miserables.txt:3332:incessantly in my ears: ‘There are people who are hungry! There are
tests/les_miserables.txt:3333:people who are cold! There are poor people! There are poor people!’”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3338:Nevertheless, in churchmen, luxury is wrong, except in connection with
tests/les_miserables.txt:3339:representations and ceremonies. It seems to reveal habits which have
tests/les_miserables.txt:3340:very little that is charitable about them. An opulent priest is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3341:contradiction. The priest must keep close to the poor. Now, can one
tests/les_miserables.txt:3342:come in contact incessantly night and day with all this distress, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:3346:workman who is working near a furnace, and who has neither a singed
tests/les_miserables.txt:3347:hair, nor blackened nails, nor a drop of sweat, nor a speck of ashes on
tests/les_miserables.txt:3348:his face? The first proof of charity in the priest, in the bishop
tests/les_miserables.txt:3349:especially, is poverty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3353:It must not be supposed, however, that he shared what we call the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3354:“ideas of the century” on certain delicate points. He took very little
tests/les_miserables.txt:3355:part in the theological quarrels of the moment, and maintained silence
tests/les_miserables.txt:3356:on questions in which Church and State were implicated; but if he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:3358:ultramontane rather than a gallican. Since we are making a portrait,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3359:and since we do not wish to conceal anything, we are forced to add that
tests/les_miserables.txt:3360:he was glacial towards Napoleon in his decline. Beginning with 1813, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:3361:gave in his adherence to or applauded all hostile manifestations. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:3363:of Elba, and he abstained from ordering public prayers for the Emperor
tests/les_miserables.txt:3364:in his diocese during the Hundred Days.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3367:general, the other a prefect. He wrote to both with tolerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:3368:frequency. He was harsh for a time towards the former, because, holding
tests/les_miserables.txt:3369:a command in Provence at the epoch of the disembarkation at Cannes, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3372:desirous of allowing to escape. His correspondence with the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:3373:brother, the ex-prefect, a fine, worthy man who lived in retirement at
tests/les_miserables.txt:3374:Paris, Rue Cassette, remained more affectionate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3377:of bitterness, his cloud. The shadow of the passions of the moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:3378:traversed this grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3379:Certainly, such a man would have done well not to entertain any
tests/les_miserables.txt:3380:political opinions. Let there be no mistake as to our meaning: we are
tests/les_miserables.txt:3381:not confounding what is called “political opinions” with the grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:3382:aspiration for progress, with the sublime faith, patriotic, democratic,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3383:humane, which in our day should be the very foundation of every
tests/les_miserables.txt:3384:generous intellect. Without going deeply into questions which are only
tests/les_miserables.txt:3385:indirectly connected with the subject of this book, we will simply say
tests/les_miserables.txt:3387:Royalist, and if his glance had never been, for a single instant,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3388:turned away from that serene contemplation in which is distinctly
tests/les_miserables.txt:3389:discernible, above the fictions and the hatreds of this world, above
tests/les_miserables.txt:3390:the stormy vicissitudes of human things, the beaming of those three
tests/les_miserables.txt:3391:pure radiances, truth, justice, and charity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3393:While admitting that it was not for a political office that God created
tests/les_miserables.txt:3394:Monseigneur Welcome, we should have understood and admired his protest
tests/les_miserables.txt:3396:perilous resistance to the all-powerful Napoleon. But that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:3397:pleases us in people who are rising pleases us less in the case of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3399:danger, and in any case, the combatants of the first hour have alone
tests/les_miserables.txt:3401:stubborn accuser in prosperity should hold his peace in the face of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3402:ruin. The denunciator of success is the only legitimate executioner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3403:the fall. As for us, when Providence intervenes and strikes, we let it
tests/les_miserables.txt:3404:work. 1812 commenced to disarm us. In 1813 the cowardly breach of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3405:silence of that taciturn legislative body, emboldened by catastrophe,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3406:possessed only traits which aroused indignation. And it was a crime to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3407:applaud, in 1814, in the presence of those marshals who betrayed; in
tests/les_miserables.txt:3408:the presence of that senate which passed from one dunghill to another,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3409:insulting after having deified; in the presence of that idolatry which
tests/les_miserables.txt:3412:when France was seized with a shiver at their sinister approach, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:3413:Waterloo could be dimly discerned opening before Napoleon, the mournful
tests/les_miserables.txt:3414:acclamation of the army and the people to the condemned of destiny had
tests/les_miserables.txt:3415:nothing laughable in it, and, after making all allowance for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3417:have failed to recognize the august and touching features presented by
tests/les_miserables.txt:3418:the embrace of a great nation and a great man on the brink of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3421:With this exception, he was in all things just, true, equitable,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3422:intelligent, humble and dignified, beneficent and kindly, which is only
tests/les_miserables.txt:3423:another sort of benevolence. He was a priest, a sage, and a man. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:3424:must be admitted, that even in the political views with which we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:3425:just reproached him, and which we are disposed to judge almost with
tests/les_miserables.txt:3427:speaking here. The porter of the town-hall had been placed there by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3428:Emperor. He was an old non-commissioned officer of the old guard, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3429:member of the Legion of Honor at Austerlitz, as much of a Bonapartist
tests/les_miserables.txt:3430:as the eagle. This poor fellow occasionally let slip inconsiderate
tests/les_miserables.txt:3431:remarks, which the law then stigmatized as _seditious speeches_. After
tests/les_miserables.txt:3434:be obliged to wear his cross. He had himself devoutly removed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3435:imperial effigy from the cross which Napoleon had given him; this made
tests/les_miserables.txt:3436:a hole, and he would not put anything in its place. _“I will die,”_ he
tests/les_miserables.txt:3438:scoff aloud at Louis XVIII. “The gouty old creature in English
tests/les_miserables.txt:3440:queue of his.”_ He was happy to combine in the same imprecation the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:3441:things which he most detested, Prussia and England. He did it so often
tests/les_miserables.txt:3442:that he lost his place. There he was, turned out of the house, with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3443:wife and children, and without bread. The Bishop sent for him, reproved
tests/les_miserables.txt:3444:him gently, and appointed him beadle in the cathedral.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3446:In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had, by dint of holy
tests/les_miserables.txt:3448:and filial reverence. Even his conduct towards Napoleon had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:3449:accepted and tacitly pardoned, as it were, by the people, the good and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3450:weakly flock who adored their emperor, but loved their bishop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3459:abbés, just as a general is by a covey of young officers. This is what
tests/les_miserables.txt:3460:that charming Saint François de Sales calls somewhere “les prêtres
tests/les_miserables.txt:3461:blancs-becs,” callow priests. Every career has its aspirants, who form
tests/les_miserables.txt:3462:a train for those who have attained eminence in it. There is no power
tests/les_miserables.txt:3463:which has not its dependents. There is no fortune which has not its
tests/les_miserables.txt:3464:court. The seekers of the future eddy around the splendid present.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3465:Every metropolis has its staff of officials. Every bishop who possesses
tests/les_miserables.txt:3466:the least influence has about him his patrol of cherubim from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3467:seminary, which goes the round, and maintains good order in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3468:episcopal palace, and mounts guard over monseigneur’s smile. To please
tests/les_miserables.txt:3470:sub-diaconate. It is necessary to walk one’s path discreetly; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3471:apostleship does not disdain the canonship.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3474:Church. These are the bishops who stand well at Court, who are rich,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3475:well endowed, skilful, accepted by the world, who know how to pray, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:3476:doubt, but who know also how to beg, who feel little scruple at making
tests/les_miserables.txt:3477:a whole diocese dance attendance in their person, who are connecting
tests/les_miserables.txt:3478:links between the sacristy and diplomacy, who are abbés rather than
tests/les_miserables.txt:3479:priests, prelates rather than bishops. Happy those who approach them!
tests/les_miserables.txt:3480:Being persons of influence, they create a shower about them, upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3482:the art of pleasing, of large parishes, prebends, archidiaconates,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3483:chaplaincies, and cathedral posts, while awaiting episcopal honors. As
tests/les_miserables.txt:3484:they advance themselves, they cause their satellites to progress also;
tests/les_miserables.txt:3485:it is a whole solar system on the march. Their radiance casts a gleam
tests/les_miserables.txt:3486:of purple over their suite. Their prosperity is crumbled up behind the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3487:scenes, into nice little promotions. The larger the diocese of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3488:patron, the fatter the curacy for the favorite. And then, there is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3489:Rome. A bishop who understands how to become an archbishop, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:3490:archbishop who knows how to become a cardinal, carries you with him as
tests/les_miserables.txt:3491:conclavist; you enter a court of papal jurisdiction, you receive the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3492:pallium, and behold! you are an auditor, then a papal chamberlain, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:3493:monsignor, and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step, and between
tests/les_miserables.txt:3494:the Eminence and the Holiness there is but the smoke of a ballot. Every
tests/les_miserables.txt:3495:skull-cap may dream of the tiara. The priest is nowadays the only man
tests/les_miserables.txt:3496:who can become a king in a regular manner; and what a king! the supreme
tests/les_miserables.txt:3498:blushing choristers, how many youthful abbés bear on their heads
tests/les_miserables.txt:3499:Perrette’s pot of milk! Who knows how easy it is for ambition to call
tests/les_miserables.txt:3500:itself vocation? in good faith, perchance, and deceiving itself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3503:Monseigneur Bienvenu, poor, humble, retiring, was not accounted among
tests/les_miserables.txt:3504:the big mitres. This was plain from the complete absence of young
tests/les_miserables.txt:3507:Not a single sprouting ambition committed the folly of putting forth
tests/les_miserables.txt:3508:its foliage in his shadow. His canons and grand-vicars were good old
tests/les_miserables.txt:3509:men, rather vulgar like himself, walled up like him in this diocese,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3510:without exit to a cardinalship, and who resembled their bishop, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:3511:this difference, that they were finished and he was completed. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:3514:seminary than they got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aix
tests/les_miserables.txt:3515:or of Auch, and went off in a great hurry. For, in short, we repeat it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3517:is a dangerous neighbor; he might communicate to you, by contagion, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:3518:incurable poverty, an anchylosis of the joints, which are useful in
tests/les_miserables.txt:3519:advancement, and in short, more renunciation than you desire; and this
tests/les_miserables.txt:3520:infectious virtue is avoided. Hence the isolation of Monseigneur
tests/les_miserables.txt:3521:Bienvenu. We live in the midst of a gloomy society. Success; that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3522:the lesson which falls drop by drop from the slope of corruption.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3524:Be it said in passing, that success is a very hideous thing. Its false
tests/les_miserables.txt:3525:resemblance to merit deceives men. For the masses, success has almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:3526:the same profile as supremacy. Success, that Menæchmus of talent, has
tests/les_miserables.txt:3527:one dupe,—history. Juvenal and Tacitus alone grumble at it. In our day,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3528:a philosophy which is almost official has entered into its service,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3529:wears the livery of success, and performs the service of its
tests/les_miserables.txt:3530:antechamber. Succeed: theory. Prosperity argues capacity. Win in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3531:lottery, and behold! you are a clever man. He who triumphs is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3533:in that. Be lucky, and you will have all the rest; be happy, and people
tests/les_miserables.txt:3534:will think you great. Outside of five or six immense exceptions, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:3535:compose the splendor of a century, contemporary admiration is nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:3537:arrival by pure chance, so long as you do arrive. The common herd is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:3538:old Narcissus who adores himself, and who applauds the vulgar herd.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3539:That enormous ability by virtue of which one is Moses, Æschylus, Dante,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3540:Michael Angelo, or Napoleon, the multitude awards on the spot, and by
tests/les_miserables.txt:3541:acclamation, to whomsoever attains his object, in whatsoever it may
tests/les_miserables.txt:3542:consist. Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy: let a false
tests/les_miserables.txt:3543:Corneille compose _Tiridate;_ let a eunuch come to possess a harem; let
tests/les_miserables.txt:3544:a military Prudhomme accidentally win the decisive battle of an epoch;
tests/les_miserables.txt:3545:let an apothecary invent cardboard shoe-soles for the army of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3546:Sambre-and-Meuse, and construct for himself, out of this cardboard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3547:sold as leather, four hundred thousand francs of income; let a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3548:pork-packer espouse usury, and cause it to bring forth seven or eight
tests/les_miserables.txt:3549:millions, of which he is the father and of which it is the mother; let
tests/les_miserables.txt:3550:a preacher become a bishop by force of his nasal drawl; let the steward
tests/les_miserables.txt:3551:of a fine family be so rich on retiring from service that he is made
tests/les_miserables.txt:3552:minister of finances,—and men call that Genius, just as they call the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3553:face of Mousqueton _Beauty_, and the mien of Claude _Majesty_. With the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3554:constellations of space they confound the stars of the abyss which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:3555:made in the soft mire of the puddle by the feet of ducks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3563:We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D—— on the score of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3564:orthodoxy. In the presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no mood
tests/les_miserables.txt:3565:but respect. The conscience of the just man should be accepted on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3566:word. Moreover, certain natures being given, we admit the possible
tests/les_miserables.txt:3570:What did he think of this dogma, or of that mystery? These secrets of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3571:the inner tribunal of the conscience are known only to the tomb, where
tests/les_miserables.txt:3572:souls enter naked. The point on which we are certain is, that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3573:difficulties of faith never resolved themselves into hypocrisy in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3574:case. No decay is possible to the diamond. He believed to the extent of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3575:his powers. _“Credo in Patrem,”_ he often exclaimed. Moreover, he drew
tests/les_miserables.txt:3576:from good works that amount of satisfaction which suffices to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3577:conscience, and which whispers to a man, “Thou art with God!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3580:The point which we consider it our duty to note is, that outside of and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3581:beyond his faith, as it were, the Bishop possessed an excess of love.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3582:It was in that quarter, _quia multum amavit_,—because he loved
tests/les_miserables.txt:3583:much—that he was regarded as vulnerable by “serious men,” “grave
tests/les_miserables.txt:3584:persons” and “reasonable people”; favorite locutions of our sad world
tests/les_miserables.txt:3585:where egotism takes its word of command from pedantry. What was this
tests/les_miserables.txt:3586:excess of love? It was a serene benevolence which overflowed men, as we
tests/les_miserables.txt:3587:have already pointed out, and which, on occasion, extended even to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3589:creation. Every man, even the best, has within him a thoughtless
tests/les_miserables.txt:3590:harshness which he reserves for animals. The Bishop of D—— had none of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3591:that harshness, which is peculiar to many priests, nevertheless. He did
tests/les_miserables.txt:3593:of Ecclesiastes: “Who knoweth whither the soul of the animal goeth?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3594:Hideousness of aspect, deformity of instinct, troubled him not, and did
tests/les_miserables.txt:3595:not arouse his indignation. He was touched, almost softened by them. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:3597:life which is apparent, the cause, the explanation, or the excuse for
tests/les_miserables.txt:3598:them. He seemed at times to be asking God to commute these penalties.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3600:deciphering a palimpsest, that portion of chaos which still exists in
tests/les_miserables.txt:3601:nature. This reverie sometimes caused him to utter odd sayings. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:3604:something on the ground; it was a large, black, hairy, frightful
tests/les_miserables.txt:3610:Why not mention these almost divinely childish sayings of kindness?
tests/les_miserables.txt:3611:Puerile they may be; but these sublime puerilities were peculiar to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3612:Saint Francis d’Assisi and of Marcus Aurelius. One day he sprained his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3620:instinct of nature than the result of a grand conviction which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:3621:filtered into his heart through the medium of life, and had trickled
tests/les_miserables.txt:3622:there slowly, thought by thought; for, in a character, as in a rock,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3624:uneffaceable; these formations are indestructible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3626:In 1815, as we think we have already said, he reached his seventy-fifth
tests/les_miserables.txt:3628:he was rather plump; and, in order to combat this tendency, he was fond
tests/les_miserables.txt:3630:slightly bent, a detail from which we do not pretend to draw any
tests/les_miserables.txt:3631:conclusion. Gregory XVI., at the age of eighty, held himself erect and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3632:smiling, which did not prevent him from being a bad bishop. Monseigneur
tests/les_miserables.txt:3633:Welcome had what the people term a “fine head,” but so amiable was he
tests/les_miserables.txt:3636:When he conversed with that infantile gayety which was one of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3637:charms, and of which we have already spoken, people felt at their ease
tests/les_miserables.txt:3639:and ruddy complexion, his very white teeth, all of which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:3640:preserved, and which were displayed by his smile, gave him that open
tests/les_miserables.txt:3641:and easy air which cause the remark to be made of a man, “He’s a good
tests/les_miserables.txt:3643:recalled, was the effect which he produced upon Napoleon. On the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:3644:encounter, and to one who saw him for the first time, he was nothing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3645:in fact, but a fine man. But if one remained near him for a few hours,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3646:and beheld him in the least degree pensive, the fine man became
tests/les_miserables.txt:3648:what; his broad and serious brow, rendered august by his white locks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3649:became august also by virtue of meditation; majesty radiated from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3650:goodness, though his goodness ceased not to be radiant; one experienced
tests/les_miserables.txt:3651:something of the emotion which one would feel on beholding a smiling
tests/les_miserables.txt:3652:angel slowly unfold his wings, without ceasing to smile. Respect, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:3653:unutterable respect, penetrated you by degrees and mounted to your
tests/les_miserables.txt:3656:can no longer be anything but gentle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3658:As we have seen, prayer, the celebration of the offices of religion,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3659:alms-giving, the consolation of the afflicted, the cultivation of a bit
tests/les_miserables.txt:3660:of land, fraternity, frugality, hospitality, renunciation, confidence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3661:study, work, filled every day of his life. _Filled_ is exactly the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3662:word; certainly the Bishop’s day was quite full to the brim, of good
tests/les_miserables.txt:3663:words and good deeds. Nevertheless, it was not complete if cold or
tests/les_miserables.txt:3667:the presence of the grand spectacles of the nocturnal heavens.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3668:Sometimes, if the two old women were not asleep, they heard him pacing
tests/les_miserables.txt:3669:slowly along the walks at a very advanced hour of the night. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:3670:there alone, communing with himself, peaceful, adoring, comparing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3672:darkness by the visible splendor of the constellations and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3673:invisible splendor of God, opening his heart to the thoughts which fall
tests/les_miserables.txt:3674:from the Unknown. At such moments, while he offered his heart at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3675:hour when nocturnal flowers offer their perfume, illuminated like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3676:lamp amid the starry night, as he poured himself out in ecstasy in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3677:midst of the universal radiance of creation, he could not have told
tests/les_miserables.txt:3679:take its flight from him, and something descend into him. Mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:3680:exchange of the abysses of the soul with the abysses of the universe!
tests/les_miserables.txt:3682:He thought of the grandeur and presence of God; of the future eternity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3684:strange; of all the infinities, which pierced their way into all his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3685:senses, beneath his eyes; and, without seeking to comprehend the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3686:incomprehensible, he gazed upon it. He did not study God; he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:3687:dazzled by him. He considered those magnificent conjunctions of atoms,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3688:which communicate aspects to matter, reveal forces by verifying them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3689:create individualities in unity, proportions in extent, the innumerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:3690:in the infinite, and, through light, produce beauty. These conjunctions
tests/les_miserables.txt:3691:are formed and dissolved incessantly; hence life and death.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3693:He seated himself on a wooden bench, with his back against a decrepit
tests/les_miserables.txt:3695:his fruit-trees. This quarter of an acre, so poorly planted, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:3696:encumbered with mean buildings and sheds, was dear to him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3701:daytime and contemplation at night? Was not this narrow enclosure, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:3702:the heavens for a ceiling, sufficient to enable him to adore God in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3703:most divine works, in turn? Does not this comprehend all, in fact? and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3704:what is there left to desire beyond it? A little garden in which to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3705:walk, and immensity in which to dream. At one’s feet that which can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:3706:cultivated and plucked; over head that which one can study and meditate
tests/les_miserables.txt:3717:Since this sort of details might, particularly at the present moment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3719:certain “pantheistical” physiognomy, and induce the belief, either to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3720:his credit or discredit, that he entertained one of those personal
tests/les_miserables.txt:3721:philosophies which are peculiar to our century, which sometimes spring
tests/les_miserables.txt:3723:usurp the place of religion, we insist upon it, that not one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:3724:persons who knew Monseigneur Welcome would have thought himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:3725:authorized to think anything of the sort. That which enlightened this
tests/les_miserables.txt:3726:man was his heart. His wisdom was made of the light which comes from
tests/les_miserables.txt:3729:No systems; many works. Abstruse speculations contain vertigo; no,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3730:there is nothing to indicate that he risked his mind in apocalypses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3732:probably have felt a scruple at sounding too far in advance certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:3733:problems which are, in a manner, reserved for terrible great minds.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3734:There is a sacred horror beneath the porches of the enigma; those
tests/les_miserables.txt:3739:Geniuses in the impenetrable depths of abstraction and pure
tests/les_miserables.txt:3740:speculation, situated, so to speak, above all dogmas, propose their
tests/les_miserables.txt:3741:ideas to God. Their prayer audaciously offers discussion. Their
tests/les_miserables.txt:3742:adoration interrogates. This is direct religion, which is full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3743:anxiety and responsibility for him who attempts its steep cliffs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3747:a sort of splendid reaction, it with it dazzles nature; the mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:3748:world which surrounds us renders back what it has received; it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3749:probable that the contemplators are contemplated. However that may be,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3750:there are on earth men who—are they men?—perceive distinctly at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3752:have the terrible vision of the infinite mountain. Monseigneur Welcome
tests/les_miserables.txt:3753:was one of these men; Monseigneur Welcome was not a genius. He would
tests/les_miserables.txt:3754:have feared those sublimities whence some very great men even, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:3755:Swedenborg and Pascal, have slipped into insanity. Certainly, these
tests/les_miserables.txt:3757:one approaches to ideal perfection. As for him, he took the path which
tests/les_miserables.txt:3760:He did not attempt to impart to his chasuble the folds of Elijah’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:3761:mantle; he projected no ray of future upon the dark groundswell of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3762:events; he did not see to condense in flame the light of things; he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:3763:nothing of the prophet and nothing of the magician about him. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:3766:That he carried prayer to the pitch of a superhuman aspiration is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3767:probable: but one can no more pray too much than one can love too much;
tests/les_miserables.txt:3769:Jerome would be heretics.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3771:He inclined towards all that groans and all that expiates. The universe
tests/les_miserables.txt:3774:solve the enigma, he strove to dress the wound. The terrible spectacle
tests/les_miserables.txt:3775:of created things developed tenderness in him; he was occupied only in
tests/les_miserables.txt:3777:compassionate and relieve. That which exists was for this good and rare
tests/les_miserables.txt:3778:priest a permanent subject of sadness which sought consolation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3780:There are men who toil at extracting gold; he toiled at the extraction
tests/les_miserables.txt:3781:of pity. Universal misery was his mine. The sadness which reigned
tests/les_miserables.txt:3782:everywhere was but an excuse for unfailing kindness. _Love each other;_
tests/les_miserables.txt:3783:he declared this to be complete, desired nothing further, and that was
tests/les_miserables.txt:3784:the whole of his doctrine. One day, that man who believed himself to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:3786:the Bishop: “Just survey the spectacle of the world: all war against
tests/les_miserables.txt:3787:all; the strongest has the most wit. Your _love each other_ is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3788:nonsense.”—_“Well,”_ replied Monseigneur Welcome, without contesting
tests/les_miserables.txt:3792:questions which attract and terrify, the fathomless perspectives of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3793:abstraction, the precipices of metaphysics—all those profundities which
tests/les_miserables.txt:3794:converge, for the apostle in God, for the atheist in nothingness;
tests/les_miserables.txt:3795:destiny, good and evil, the way of being against being, the conscience
tests/les_miserables.txt:3797:in death, the recapitulation of existences which the tomb contains, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3798:incomprehensible grafting of successive loves on the persistent _I_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3799:the essence, the substance, the Nile, and the Ens, the soul, nature,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3800:liberty, necessity; perpendicular problems, sinister obscurities, where
tests/les_miserables.txt:3801:lean the gigantic archangels of the human mind; formidable abysses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3802:which Lucretius, Manou, Saint Paul, Dante, contemplate with eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:3803:flashing lightning, which seems by its steady gaze on the infinite to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3804:cause stars to blaze forth there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3807:mysterious questions without scrutinizing them, and without troubling
tests/les_miserables.txt:3808:his own mind with them, and who cherished in his own soul a grave
tests/les_miserables.txt:3809:respect for darkness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3822:Early in the month of October, 1815, about an hour before sunset, a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:3826:difficult to encounter a wayfarer of more wretched appearance. He was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3827:man of medium stature, thickset and robust, in the prime of life. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:3828:might have been forty-six or forty-eight years old. A cap with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3829:drooping leather visor partly concealed his face, burned and tanned by
tests/les_miserables.txt:3830:sun and wind, and dripping with perspiration. His shirt of coarse
tests/les_miserables.txt:3831:yellow linen, fastened at the neck by a small silver anchor, permitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:3832:a view of his hairy breast: he had a cravat twisted into a string;
tests/les_miserables.txt:3834:torn on the other; an old gray, tattered blouse, patched on one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3835:elbows with a bit of green cloth sewed on with twine; a tightly packed
tests/les_miserables.txt:3836:soldier knapsack, well buckled and perfectly new, on his back; an
tests/les_miserables.txt:3837:enormous, knotty stick in his hand; iron-shod shoes on his stockingless
tests/les_miserables.txt:3841:what sordid quality to this dilapidated whole. His hair was closely
tests/les_miserables.txt:3842:cut, yet bristling, for it had begun to grow a little, and did not seem
tests/les_miserables.txt:3843:to have been cut for some time.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3845:No one knew him. He was evidently only a chance passer-by. Whence came
tests/les_miserables.txt:3847:entrance into D—— by the same street which, seven months previously,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3850:very much fatigued. Some women of the ancient market town which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:3851:situated below the city had seen him pause beneath the trees of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3852:boulevard Gassendi, and drink at the fountain which stands at the end
tests/les_miserables.txt:3853:of the promenade. He must have been very thirsty: for the children who
tests/les_miserables.txt:3854:followed him saw him stop again for a drink, two hundred paces further
tests/les_miserables.txt:3855:on, at the fountain in the market-place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3857:On arriving at the corner of the Rue Poichevert, he turned to the left,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3858:and directed his steps toward the town-hall. He entered, then came out
tests/les_miserables.txt:3860:stone bench which General Drouot had mounted on the 4th of March to
tests/les_miserables.txt:3862:proclamation of the Gulf Juan. The man pulled off his cap and humbly
tests/les_miserables.txt:3870:Colbas_. This inn had for a landlord a certain Jacquin Labarre, a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:3871:of consideration in the town on account of his relationship to another
tests/les_miserables.txt:3874:had circulated throughout the country with regard to this inn of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3876:carter, had made frequent trips thither in the month of January, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3877:that he had distributed crosses of honor to the soldiers and handfuls
tests/les_miserables.txt:3878:of gold to the citizens. The truth is, that when the Emperor entered
tests/les_miserables.txt:3880:prefecture; he had thanked the mayor, saying, _“I am going to the house
tests/les_miserables.txt:3881:of a brave man of my acquaintance”;_ and he had betaken himself to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3883:reflected upon the Labarre of the _Cross of Colbas_, at a distance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3885:cousin of the man of Grenoble.”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:3887:The man bent his steps towards this inn, which was the best in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3888:country-side. He entered the kitchen, which opened on a level with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3890:fireplace. The host, who was also the chief cook, was going from one
tests/les_miserables.txt:3891:stew-pan to another, very busily superintending an excellent dinner
tests/les_miserables.txt:3892:designed for the wagoners, whose loud talking, conversation, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3894:travelled knows that there is no one who indulges in better cheer than
tests/les_miserables.txt:3895:wagoners. A fat marmot, flanked by white partridges and heather-cocks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3897:carps from Lake Lauzet and a trout from Lake Alloz were cooking.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3899:The host, hearing the door open and seeing a newcomer enter, said,
tests/les_miserables.txt:3908:took in the traveller’s appearance with a single glance, and added, “By
tests/les_miserables.txt:3912:The man drew a large leather purse from the pocket of his blouse, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3916:“In that case, we are at your service,” said the host.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3918:The man put his purse back in his pocket, removed his knapsack from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3919:back, put it on the ground near the door, retained his stick in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3920:hand, and seated himself on a low stool close to the fire. D—— is in
tests/les_miserables.txt:3921:the mountains. The evenings are cold there in October.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3923:But as the host went back and forth, he scrutinized the traveller.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3929:While the newcomer was warming himself before the fire, with his back
tests/les_miserables.txt:3930:turned, the worthy host, Jacquin Labarre, drew a pencil from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:3931:pocket, then tore off the corner of an old newspaper which was lying on
tests/les_miserables.txt:3933:two, folded it without sealing, and then intrusted this scrap of paper
tests/les_miserables.txt:3934:to a child who seemed to serve him in the capacity both of scullion and
tests/les_miserables.txt:3935:lackey. The landlord whispered a word in the scullion’s ear, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:3936:child set off on a run in the direction of the town-hall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3940:Once more he inquired, “Will dinner be ready soon?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3945:The child returned. He brought back the paper. The host unfolded it
tests/les_miserables.txt:3946:eagerly, like a person who is expecting a reply. He seemed to read it
tests/les_miserables.txt:3948:moment. Then he took a step in the direction of the traveller, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:3949:appeared to be immersed in reflections which were not very serene.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3951:“I cannot receive you, sir,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:3956:you in advance? I have money, I tell you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3976:“I cannot.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3982:“The horses take up all the space.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3985:“Very well!” retorted the man; “a corner of the loft then, a truss of
tests/les_miserables.txt:3989:“I cannot give you any dinner.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:3992:This declaration, made in a measured but firm tone, struck the stranger
tests/les_miserables.txt:3995:“Ah! bah! But I am dying of hunger. I have been walking since sunrise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4001:The man burst out laughing, and turned towards the fireplace and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4023:“They have engaged the whole of it and paid for it in advance.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4026:The man seated himself again, and said, without raising his voice, “I
tests/les_miserables.txt:4030:Then the host bent down to his ear, and said in a tone which made him
tests/les_miserables.txt:4036:quickly round, and as he opened his mouth to reply, the host gazed
tests/les_miserables.txt:4037:steadily at him and added, still in a low voice: “Stop! there’s enough
tests/les_miserables.txt:4040:you come in I suspected something; I sent to the town-hall, and this
tests/les_miserables.txt:4044:So saying, he held out to the stranger, fully unfolded, the paper which
tests/les_miserables.txt:4046:town-hall to the inn. The man cast a glance upon it. The landlord
tests/les_miserables.txt:4052:The man dropped his head, picked up the knapsack which he had deposited
tests/les_miserables.txt:4055:He chose the principal street. He walked straight on at a venture,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4056:keeping close to the houses like a sad and humiliated man. He did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:4060:vivaciously, and pointing him out with his finger; and, from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4061:glances of terror and distrust cast by the group, he might have divined
tests/les_miserables.txt:4062:that his arrival would speedily become an event for the whole town.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4064:He saw nothing of all this. People who are crushed do not look behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:4065:them. They know but too well the evil fate which follows them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4067:Thus he proceeded for some time, walking on without ceasing, traversing
tests/les_miserables.txt:4068:at random streets of which he knew nothing, forgetful of his fatigue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4069:as is often the case when a man is sad. All at once he felt the pangs
tests/les_miserables.txt:4070:of hunger sharply. Night was drawing near. He glanced about him, to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:4071:whether he could not discover some shelter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4073:The fine hostelry was closed to him; he was seeking some very humble
tests/les_miserables.txt:4074:public house, some hovel, however lowly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4076:Just then a light flashed up at the end of the streets; a pine branch
tests/les_miserables.txt:4077:suspended from a cross-beam of iron was outlined against the white sky
tests/les_miserables.txt:4078:of the twilight. He proceeded thither.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4080:It proved to be, in fact, a public house. The public house which is in
tests/les_miserables.txt:4084:the interior of the low-studded room of the public house, illuminated
tests/les_miserables.txt:4087:iron pot, suspended from a crane, bubbled over the flame.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4089:The entrance to this public house, which is also a sort of an inn, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:4092:slipped into the yard, halted again, then raised the latch timidly and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4105:him for some time while he was taking off his knapsack.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4107:The host said to him, “There is the fire. The supper is cooking in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4108:pot. Come and warm yourself, comrade.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4111:He approached and seated himself near the hearth. He stretched out his
tests/les_miserables.txt:4112:feet, which were exhausted with fatigue, to the fire; a fine odor was
tests/les_miserables.txt:4113:emitted by the pot. All that could be distinguished of his face,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4114:beneath his cap, which was well pulled down, assumed a vague appearance
tests/les_miserables.txt:4115:of comfort, mingled with that other poignant aspect which habitual
tests/les_miserables.txt:4118:It was, moreover, a firm, energetic, and melancholy profile. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:4119:physiognomy was strangely composed; it began by seeming humble, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4124:before entering the public house of the Rue de Chaffaut, had been to
tests/les_miserables.txt:4125:stable his horse at Labarre’s. It chanced that he had that very morning
tests/les_miserables.txt:4126:encountered this unprepossessing stranger on the road between Bras
tests/les_miserables.txt:4127:d’Asse and—I have forgotten the name. I think it was Escoublon. Now,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4129:requested him to take him on his crupper; to which the fishmonger had
tests/les_miserables.txt:4130:made no reply except by redoubling his gait. This fishmonger had been a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4131:member half an hour previously of the group which surrounded Jacquin
tests/les_miserables.txt:4132:Labarre, and had himself related his disagreeable encounter of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4134:made an imperceptible sign to the tavern-keeper. The tavern-keeper went
tests/les_miserables.txt:4135:to him. They exchanged a few words in a low tone. The man had again
tests/les_miserables.txt:4136:become absorbed in his reflections.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4138:The tavern-keeper returned to the fireplace, laid his hand abruptly on
tests/les_miserables.txt:4162:The man took his stick and his knapsack and departed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4164:As he went out, some children who had followed him from the _Cross of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4166:him. He retraced his steps in anger, and threatened them with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:4167:stick: the children dispersed like a flock of birds.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4169:He passed before the prison. At the door hung an iron chain attached to
tests/les_miserables.txt:4172:The wicket opened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4174:“Turnkey,” said he, removing his cap politely, “will you have the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4178:A voice replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:4184:The wicket closed again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4186:He entered a little street in which there were many gardens. Some of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4187:them are enclosed only by hedges, which lends a cheerful aspect to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4188:street. In the midst of these gardens and hedges he caught sight of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4189:small house of a single story, the window of which was lighted up. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:4190:peered through the pane as he had done at the public house. Within was
tests/les_miserables.txt:4191:a large whitewashed room, with a bed draped in printed cotton stuff,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4192:and a cradle in one corner, a few wooden chairs, and a double-barrelled
tests/les_miserables.txt:4193:gun hanging on the wall. A table was spread in the centre of the room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4194:A copper lamp illuminated the tablecloth of coarse white linen, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4197:merry and open countenance, who was dandling a little child on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:4198:knees. Close by a very young woman was nursing another child. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:4199:father was laughing, the child was laughing, the mother was smiling.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4201:The stranger paused a moment in reverie before this tender and calming
tests/les_miserables.txt:4202:spectacle. What was taking place within him? He alone could have told.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4204:hospitable, and that, in a place where he beheld so much happiness, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:4207:He tapped on the pane with a very small and feeble knock.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4214:knocking.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4221:The husband rose, took the lamp, and went to the door, which he opened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4224:huge leather apron, which reached to his left shoulder, and which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4225:hammer, a red handkerchief, a powder-horn, and all sorts of objects
tests/les_miserables.txt:4226:which were upheld by the girdle, as in a pocket, caused to bulge out.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4227:He carried his head thrown backwards; his shirt, widely opened and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4228:turned back, displayed his bull neck, white and bare. He had thick
tests/les_miserables.txt:4229:eyelashes, enormous black whiskers, prominent eyes, the lower part of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4230:his face like a snout; and besides all this, that air of being on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:4231:own ground, which is indescribable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4233:“Pardon me, sir,” said the wayfarer, “Could you, in consideration of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4234:payment, give me a plate of soup and a corner of that shed yonder in
tests/les_miserables.txt:4235:the garden, in which to sleep? Tell me; can you? For money?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4240:The man replied: “I have just come from Puy-Moisson. I have walked all
tests/les_miserables.txt:4244:“I would not refuse,” said the peasant, “to lodge any respectable man
tests/les_miserables.txt:4262:receive me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4268:The stranger’s embarrassment increased; he stammered, “He did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:4269:receive me either.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4272:The peasant’s countenance assumed an expression of distrust; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:4273:surveyed the newcomer from head to feet, and suddenly exclaimed, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4279:He cast a fresh glance upon the stranger, took three steps backwards,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4280:placed the lamp on the table, and took his gun down from the wall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4283:clasped her two children in her arms, and had taken refuge
tests/les_miserables.txt:4284:precipitately behind her husband, staring in terror at the stranger,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4285:with her bosom uncovered, and with frightened eyes, as she murmured in
tests/les_miserables.txt:4288:All this took place in less time than it requires to picture it to
tests/les_miserables.txt:4289:one’s self. After having scrutinized the man for several moments, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:4290:one scrutinizes a viper, the master of the house returned to the door
tests/les_miserables.txt:4300:Then he closed the door violently, and the man heard him shoot two
tests/les_miserables.txt:4301:large bolts. A moment later, the window-shutter was closed, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4302:sound of a bar of iron which was placed against it was audible outside.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4304:Night continued to fall. A cold wind from the Alps was blowing. By the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4305:light of the expiring day the stranger perceived, in one of the gardens
tests/les_miserables.txt:4306:which bordered the street, a sort of hut, which seemed to him to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:4307:built of sods. He climbed over the wooden fence resolutely, and found
tests/les_miserables.txt:4308:himself in the garden. He approached the hut; its door consisted of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4309:very low and narrow aperture, and it resembled those buildings which
tests/les_miserables.txt:4310:road-laborers construct for themselves along the roads. He thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:4311:without doubt, that it was, in fact, the dwelling of a road-laborer; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:4312:was suffering from cold and hunger, but this was, at least, a shelter
tests/les_miserables.txt:4313:from the cold. This sort of dwelling is not usually occupied at night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4314:He threw himself flat on his face, and crawled into the hut. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:4316:moment, stretched out on this bed, without the power to make a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4317:movement, so fatigued was he. Then, as the knapsack on his back was in
tests/les_miserables.txt:4319:set about unbuckling one of the straps. At that moment, a ferocious
tests/les_miserables.txt:4320:growl became audible. He raised his eyes. The head of an enormous dog
tests/les_miserables.txt:4321:was outlined in the darkness at the entrance of the hut.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4326:staff, made a shield of his knapsack, and made his way out of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4327:kennel in the best way he could, not without enlarging the rents in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:4330:He left the garden in the same manner, but backwards, being obliged, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:4331:order to keep the dog respectful, to have recourse to that manœuvre
tests/les_miserables.txt:4332:with his stick which masters in that sort of fencing designate as _la
tests/les_miserables.txt:4333:rose couverte_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4335:When he had, not without difficulty, repassed the fence, and found
tests/les_miserables.txt:4336:himself once more in the street, alone, without refuge, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:4337:shelter, without a roof over his head, chased even from that bed of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4339:himself on a stone, and it appears that a passer-by heard him exclaim,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4343:He soon rose again and resumed his march. He went out of the town,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4344:hoping to find some tree or haystack in the fields which would afford
tests/les_miserables.txt:4349:gazed searchingly about him. He was in a field. Before him was one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4350:those low hills covered with close-cut stubble, which, after the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4353:The horizon was perfectly black. This was not alone the obscurity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4354:night; it was caused by very low-hanging clouds which seemed to rest
tests/les_miserables.txt:4355:upon the hill itself, and which were mounting and filling the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:4358:clouds formed at the summit of the sky a sort of whitish arch, whence a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4361:The earth was thus better lighted than the sky, which produces a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4362:particularly sinister effect, and the hill, whose contour was poor and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4364:effect was hideous, petty, lugubrious, and narrow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4366:There was nothing in the field or on the hill except a deformed tree,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4367:which writhed and shivered a few paces distant from the wayfarer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4369:This man was evidently very far from having those delicate habits of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4370:intelligence and spirit which render one sensible to the mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:4371:aspects of things; nevertheless, there was something in that sky, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:4372:that hill, in that plain, in that tree, which was so profoundly
tests/les_miserables.txt:4373:desolate, that after a moment of immobility and reverie he turned back
tests/les_miserables.txt:4376:He retraced his steps; the gates of D—— were closed. D——, which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:4378:1815 by ancient walls flanked by square towers which have been
tests/les_miserables.txt:4379:demolished since. He passed through a breach and entered the town
tests/les_miserables.txt:4382:It might have been eight o’clock in the evening. As he was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:4383:acquainted with the streets, he recommenced his walk at random.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4385:In this way he came to the prefecture, then to the seminary. As he
tests/les_miserables.txt:4386:passed through the Cathedral Square, he shook his fist at the church.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4388:At the corner of this square there is a printing establishment. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:4389:there that the proclamations of the Emperor and of the Imperial Guard
tests/les_miserables.txt:4390:to the army, brought from the Island of Elba and dictated by Napoleon
tests/les_miserables.txt:4394:on a stone bench which stands at the doorway of this printing office.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4396:At that moment an old woman came out of the church. She saw the man
tests/les_miserables.txt:4397:stretched out in the shadow. “What are you doing there, my friend?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4401:sleeping.” The good woman, who was well worthy the name, in fact, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:4404:“On this bench?” she went on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4419:“Because I have no money.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4428:The man took the four sous. Madame de R—— continued: “You cannot obtain
tests/les_miserables.txt:4430:impossible for you to pass the night thus. You are cold and hungry, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:4431:doubt. Some one might have given you a lodging out of charity.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4434:“I have knocked at all doors.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4443:The “good woman” touched the man’s arm, and pointed out to him on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4444:other side of the street a small, low house, which stood beside the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4445:Bishop’s palace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4447:“You have knocked at all doors?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4453:“Have you knocked at that one?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4459:“Knock there.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4470:on _Duties_, which was never completed, unfortunately. He was carefully
tests/les_miserables.txt:4471:compiling everything that the Fathers and the doctors have said on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:4472:important subject. His book was divided into two parts: firstly, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4473:duties of all; secondly, the duties of each individual, according to
tests/les_miserables.txt:4474:the class to which he belongs. The duties of all are the great duties.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4479:pointed out and prescribed elsewhere: to sovereigns and subjects, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:4481:young men, by Saint Peter; to husbands, fathers, children and servants,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4484:precepts he was laboriously constructing a harmonious whole, which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:4487:At eight o’clock he was still at work, writing with a good deal of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4488:inconvenience upon little squares of paper, with a big book open on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:4489:knees, when Madame Magloire entered, according to her wont, to get the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4490:silver-ware from the cupboard near his bed. A moment later, the Bishop,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4495:The dining-room was an oblong apartment, with a fireplace, which had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4499:Madame Magloire was, in fact, just putting the last touches to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4502:As she performed this service, she was conversing with Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:4505:A lamp stood on the table; the table was near the fireplace. A wood
tests/les_miserables.txt:4508:One can easily picture to one’s self these two women, both of whom were
tests/les_miserables.txt:4509:over sixty years of age. Madame Magloire small, plump, vivacious;
tests/les_miserables.txt:4511:her brother, dressed in a gown of puce-colored silk, of the fashion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4512:1806, which she had purchased at that date in Paris, and which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:4513:lasted ever since. To borrow vulgar phrases, which possess the merit of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4514:giving utterance in a single word to an idea which a whole page would
tests/les_miserables.txt:4515:hardly suffice to express, Madame Magloire had the air of a _peasant_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4517:white quilted cap, a gold Jeannette cross on a velvet ribbon upon her
tests/les_miserables.txt:4518:neck, the only bit of feminine jewelry that there was in the house, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4519:very white fichu puffing out from a gown of coarse black woollen stuff,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4520:with large, short sleeves, an apron of cotton cloth in red and green
tests/les_miserables.txt:4521:checks, knotted round the waist with a green ribbon, with a stomacher
tests/les_miserables.txt:4522:of the same attached by two pins at the upper corners, coarse shoes on
tests/les_miserables.txt:4523:her feet, and yellow stockings, like the women of Marseilles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4524:Mademoiselle Baptistine’s gown was cut on the patterns of 1806, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4526:and buttons. She concealed her gray hair under a frizzed wig known as
tests/les_miserables.txt:4527:the _baby_ wig. Madame Magloire had an intelligent, vivacious, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4528:kindly air; the two corners of her mouth unequally raised, and her
tests/les_miserables.txt:4529:upper lip, which was larger than the lower, imparted to her a rather
tests/les_miserables.txt:4530:crabbed and imperious look. So long as Monseigneur held his peace, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:4531:talked to him resolutely with a mixture of respect and freedom; but as
tests/les_miserables.txt:4534:speak. She confined herself to obeying and pleasing him. She had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:4536:eyes, and a long arched nose; but her whole visage, her whole person,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4538:She had always been predestined to gentleness; but faith, charity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4539:hope, those three virtues which mildly warm the soul, had gradually
tests/les_miserables.txt:4540:elevated that gentleness to sanctity. Nature had made her a lamb,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4541:religion had made her an angel. Poor sainted virgin! Sweet memory which
tests/les_miserables.txt:4545:episcopal residence that evening, that there are many people now living
tests/les_miserables.txt:4546:who still recall the most minute details.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4549:considerable vivacity. She was haranguing Mademoiselle Baptistine on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4550:subject which was familiar to her and to which the Bishop was also
tests/les_miserables.txt:4551:accustomed. The question concerned the lock upon the entrance door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4553:It appears that while procuring some provisions for supper, Madame
tests/les_miserables.txt:4554:Magloire had heard things in divers places. People had spoken of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4555:prowler of evil appearance; a suspicious vagabond had arrived who must
tests/les_miserables.txt:4557:heads to return home late that night might be subjected to unpleasant
tests/les_miserables.txt:4558:encounters. The police was very badly organized, moreover, because
tests/les_miserables.txt:4559:there was no love lost between the Prefect and the Mayor, who sought to
tests/les_miserables.txt:4560:injure each other by making things happen. It behooved wise people to
tests/les_miserables.txt:4561:play the part of their own police, and to guard themselves well, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4562:care must be taken to duly close, bar and barricade their houses, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4566:come from his room, where it was rather cold. He seated himself in
tests/les_miserables.txt:4577:half-turning in his chair, placing his hands on his knees, and raising
tests/les_miserables.txt:4578:towards the old servant woman his cordial face, which so easily grew
tests/les_miserables.txt:4579:joyous, and which was illuminated from below by the firelight,—“Come,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4584:little without being aware of the fact. It appeared that a Bohemian, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4585:bare-footed vagabond, a sort of dangerous mendicant, was at that moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:4586:in the town. He had presented himself at Jacquin Labarre’s to obtain
tests/les_miserables.txt:4589:the streets in the gloaming. A gallows-bird with a terrible face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4593:This willingness to interrogate encouraged Madame Magloire; it seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:4594:to her to indicate that the Bishop was on the point of becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:4598:catastrophe in this town to-night. Every one says so. And withal, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4599:police is so badly regulated” (a useful repetition). “The idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4600:living in a mountainous country, and not even having lights in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4601:streets at night! One goes out. Black as ovens, indeed! And I say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4609:Madame Magloire continued as though there had been no protest:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:4612:permit, I will go and tell Paulin Musebois, the locksmith, to come and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4613:replace the ancient locks on the doors; we have them, and it is only
tests/les_miserables.txt:4615:door which can be opened from the outside with a latch by the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:4617:night; moreover, Monseigneur has the habit of always saying ‘come in’;
tests/les_miserables.txt:4622:At that moment there came a tolerably violent knock on the door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4635:an energetic and resolute push.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4640:wandering about in search of shelter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4642:He entered, advanced a step, and halted, leaving the door open behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:4643:him. He had his knapsack on his shoulders, his cudgel in his hand, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4644:rough, audacious, weary, and violent expression in his eyes. The fire
tests/les_miserables.txt:4648:Madame Magloire had not even the strength to utter a cry. She trembled,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4653:fireplace again, she began to observe her brother, and her face became
tests/les_miserables.txt:4654:once more profoundly calm and serene.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4658:As he opened his mouth, doubtless to ask the newcomer what he desired,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4659:the man rested both hands on his staff, directed his gaze at the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:4661:said, in a loud voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:4663:“See here. My name is Jean Valjean. I am a convict from the galleys. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:4665:ago, and am on my way to Pontarlier, which is my destination. I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:4666:been walking for four days since I left Toulon. I have travelled a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4668:parts, I went to an inn, and they turned me out, because of my yellow
tests/les_miserables.txt:4669:passport, which I had shown at the town-hall. I had to do it. I went to
tests/les_miserables.txt:4670:an inn. They said to me, ‘Be off,’ at both places. No one would take
tests/les_miserables.txt:4672:dog’s kennel; the dog bit me and chased me off, as though he had been a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4676:town, to seek the recess of a doorway. Yonder, in the square, I meant
tests/les_miserables.txt:4677:to sleep on a stone bench. A good woman pointed out your house to me,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4678:and said to me, ‘Knock there!’ I have knocked. What is this place? Do
tests/les_miserables.txt:4679:you keep an inn? I have money—savings. One hundred and nine francs
tests/les_miserables.txt:4680:fifteen sous, which I earned in the galleys by my labor, in the course
tests/les_miserables.txt:4686:“Madame Magloire,” said the Bishop, “you will set another place.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4689:The man advanced three paces, and approached the lamp which was on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4691:“that’s not it. Did you hear? I am a galley-slave; a convict. I come
tests/les_miserables.txt:4692:from the galleys.” He drew from his pocket a large sheet of yellow
tests/les_miserables.txt:4693:paper, which he unfolded. “Here’s my passport. Yellow, as you see. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:4694:serves to expel me from every place where I go. Will you read it? I
tests/les_miserables.txt:4695:know how to read. I learned in the galleys. There is a school there for
tests/les_miserables.txt:4696:those who choose to learn. Hold, this is what they put on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:4697:passport: ‘Jean Valjean, discharged convict, native of’—that is nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:4700:escape on four occasions. He is a very dangerous man.’ There! Every one
tests/les_miserables.txt:4701:has cast me out. Are you willing to receive me? Is this an inn? Will
tests/les_miserables.txt:4706:bed in the alcove.” We have already explained the character of the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:4707:women’s obedience.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4709:Madame Magloire retired to execute these orders.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4717:At this point the man suddenly comprehended. The expression of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:4718:face, up to that time sombre and harsh, bore the imprint of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4719:stupefaction, of doubt, of joy, and became extraordinary. He began
tests/les_miserables.txt:4720:stammering like a crazy man:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:4722:“Really? What! You will keep me? You do not drive me forth? A convict!
tests/les_miserables.txt:4723:You call me _sir!_ You do not address me as _thou?_ ‘Get out of here,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4725:expel me, so I told you at once who I am. Oh, what a good woman that
tests/les_miserables.txt:4726:was who directed me hither! I am going to sup! A bed with a mattress
tests/les_miserables.txt:4728:since I have slept in a bed! You actually do not want me to go! You are
tests/les_miserables.txt:4738:going to demand any money of me? You are the curé, are you not? the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4739:curé of this big church? Well! I am a fool, truly! I had not perceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:4740:your skull-cap.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4743:As he spoke, he deposited his knapsack and his cudgel in a corner,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4744:replaced his passport in his pocket, and seated himself. Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:4745:Baptistine gazed mildly at him. He continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:4747:“You are humane, Monsieur le Curé; you have not scorned me. A good
tests/les_miserables.txt:4751:“No,” said the Bishop; “keep your money. How much have you? Did you not
tests/les_miserables.txt:4752:tell me one hundred and nine francs?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4757:“One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous. And how long did it take you
tests/les_miserables.txt:4769:The man continued: “I have still the whole of my money. In four days I
tests/les_miserables.txt:4770:have spent only twenty-five sous, which I earned by helping unload some
tests/les_miserables.txt:4771:wagons at Grasse. Since you are an abbé, I will tell you that we had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4772:chaplain in the galleys. And one day I saw a bishop there. Monseigneur
tests/les_miserables.txt:4773:is what they call him. He was the Bishop of Majore at Marseilles. He is
tests/les_miserables.txt:4774:the curé who rules over the other curés, you understand. Pardon me, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:4775:say that very badly; but it is such a far-off thing to me! You
tests/les_miserables.txt:4779:the three sides, with cannons with lighted matches facing us. We could
tests/les_miserables.txt:4784:While he was speaking, the Bishop had gone and shut the door, which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:4787:Madame Magloire returned. She brought a silver fork and spoon, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:4788:she placed on the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4790:“Madame Magloire,” said the Bishop, “place those things as near the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4792:on the Alps. You must be cold, sir.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4795:Each time that he uttered the word _sir_, in his voice which was so
tests/les_miserables.txt:4796:gently grave and polished, the man’s face lighted up. _Monsieur_ to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4797:convict is like a glass of water to one of the shipwrecked of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4798:_Medusa_. Ignominy thirsts for consideration.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4803:candlesticks from the chimney-piece in Monseigneur’s bed-chamber, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4804:placed them, lighted, on the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4807:You receive me into your house. You light your candles for me. Yet I
tests/les_miserables.txt:4808:have not concealed from you whence I come and that I am an unfortunate
tests/les_miserables.txt:4812:The Bishop, who was sitting close to him, gently touched his hand. “You
tests/les_miserables.txt:4813:could not help telling me who you were. This is not my house; it is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4816:hungry and thirsty; you are welcome. And do not thank me; do not say
tests/les_miserables.txt:4817:that I receive you in my house. No one is at home here, except the man
tests/les_miserables.txt:4818:who needs a refuge. I say to you, who are passing by, that you are much
tests/les_miserables.txt:4820:have I to know your name? Besides, before you told me you had one which
tests/les_miserables.txt:4826:“Really? You knew what I was called?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4829:“Yes,” replied the Bishop, “you are called my brother.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4832:“Stop, Monsieur le Curé,” exclaimed the man. “I was very hungry when I
tests/les_miserables.txt:4839:“You have suffered much?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4842:“Oh, the red coat, the ball on the ankle, a plank to sleep on, heat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4843:cold, toil, the convicts, the thrashings, the double chain for nothing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4844:the cell for one word; even sick and in bed, still the chain! Dogs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4849:“Yes,” resumed the Bishop, “you have come from a very sad place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4850:Listen. There will be more joy in heaven over the tear-bathed face of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4852:you emerge from that sad place with thoughts of hatred and of wrath
tests/les_miserables.txt:4854:of good-will and of peace, you are more worthy than any one of us.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:4858:water, oil, bread, and salt; a little bacon, a bit of mutton, figs, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4859:fresh cheese, and a large loaf of rye bread. She had, of her own
tests/les_miserables.txt:4860:accord, added to the Bishop’s ordinary fare a bottle of his old Mauves
tests/les_miserables.txt:4863:The Bishop’s face at once assumed that expression of gayety which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:4864:peculiar to hospitable natures. “To table!” he cried vivaciously. As
tests/les_miserables.txt:4865:was his custom when a stranger supped with him, he made the man sit on
tests/les_miserables.txt:4866:his right. Mademoiselle Baptistine, perfectly peaceable and natural,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4869:The Bishop asked a blessing; then helped the soup himself, according to
tests/les_miserables.txt:4870:his custom. The man began to eat with avidity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4872:All at once the Bishop said: “It strikes me there is something missing
tests/les_miserables.txt:4876:Madame Magloire had, in fact, only placed the three sets of forks and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4877:spoons which were absolutely necessary. Now, it was the usage of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4879:sets of silver on the table-cloth—an innocent ostentation. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:4880:graceful semblance of luxury was a kind of child’s play, which was full
tests/les_miserables.txt:4881:of charm in that gentle and severe household, which raised poverty into
tests/les_miserables.txt:4886:by the Bishop were glittering upon the cloth, symmetrically arranged
tests/les_miserables.txt:4895:Now, in order to convey an idea of what passed at that table, we cannot
tests/les_miserables.txt:4896:do better than to transcribe here a passage from one of Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:4897:Baptistine’s letters to Madame Boischevron, wherein the conversation
tests/les_miserables.txt:4898:between the convict and the Bishop is described with ingenious
tests/les_miserables.txt:4901:“. . . This man paid no attention to any one. He ate with the voracity
tests/les_miserables.txt:4905:but I must say that the carters who would not allow me to eat with them
tests/les_miserables.txt:4908:“Between ourselves, the remark rather shocked me. My brother replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:4913:that plainly. You cannot be even a curate. Are you really a curé? Ah,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4914:if the good God were but just, you certainly ought to be a curé!’
tests/les_miserables.txt:4927:nights are cold, the days are hot.’
tests/les_miserables.txt:4929:“‘You are going to a good country,’ said my brother. ‘During the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4930:Revolution my family was ruined. I took refuge in Franche-Comté at
tests/les_miserables.txt:4932:was good. I found plenty to occupy me. One has only to choose. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:4933:are paper mills, tanneries, distilleries, oil factories, watch
tests/les_miserables.txt:4934:factories on a large scale, steel mills, copper works, twenty iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:4935:foundries at least, four of which, situated at Lods, at Châtillon, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:4936:Audincourt, and at Beure, are tolerably large.’
tests/les_miserables.txt:4938:“I think I am not mistaken in saying that those are the names which my
tests/les_miserables.txt:4945:“‘We did have some; among others, M. de Lucenet, who was captain of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4949:relatives, one had only one’s arms. I worked. They have, in the country
tests/les_miserables.txt:4951:patriarchal and truly charming industry, my sister. It is their
tests/les_miserables.txt:4952:cheese-dairies, which they call _fruitières_.’
tests/les_miserables.txt:4956:were divided into two classes: the _big barns_ which belong to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4957:rich, and where there are forty or fifty cows which produce from seven
tests/les_miserables.txt:4958:to eight thousand cheeses each summer, and the _associated fruitières_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4959:which belong to the poor; these are the peasants of mid-mountain, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:4960:hold their cows in common, and share the proceeds. ‘They engage the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4961:services of a cheese-maker, whom they call the _grurin_; the _grurin_
tests/les_miserables.txt:4962:receives the milk of the associates three times a day, and marks the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4964:work of the cheese-dairies begins; it is towards the middle of June
tests/les_miserables.txt:4965:that the cheese-makers drive their cows to the mountains.’
tests/les_miserables.txt:4967:“The man recovered his animation as he ate. My brother made him drink
tests/les_miserables.txt:4968:that good Mauves wine, which he does not drink himself, because he says
tests/les_miserables.txt:4970:easy gayety of his with which you are acquainted, interspersing his
tests/les_miserables.txt:4971:words with graceful attentions to me. He recurred frequently to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:4972:comfortable trade of _grurin_, as though he wished the man to
tests/les_miserables.txt:4973:understand, without advising him directly and harshly, that this would
tests/les_miserables.txt:4974:afford him a refuge. One thing struck me. This man was what I have told
tests/les_miserables.txt:4976:brother utter a single word, with the exception of a few words about
tests/les_miserables.txt:4977:Jesus when he entered, which could remind the man of what he was, nor
tests/les_miserables.txt:4978:of what my brother was. To all appearances, it was an occasion for
tests/les_miserables.txt:4979:preaching him a little sermon, and of impressing the Bishop on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:4980:convict, so that a mark of the passage might remain behind. This might
tests/les_miserables.txt:4982:hands to afford a chance to nourish his soul as well as his body, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:4983:to bestow upon him some reproach, seasoned with moralizing and advice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4984:or a little commiseration, with an exhortation to conduct himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:4985:better in the future. My brother did not even ask him from what country
tests/les_miserables.txt:4986:he came, nor what was his history. For in his history there is a fault,
tests/les_miserables.txt:4987:and my brother seemed to avoid everything which could remind him of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:4988:To such a point did he carry it, that at one time, when my brother was
tests/les_miserables.txt:4989:speaking of the mountaineers of Pontarlier, _who exercise a gentle
tests/les_miserables.txt:4990:labor near heaven, and who_, he added, _are happy because they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:4991:innocent_, he stopped short, fearing lest in this remark there might
tests/les_miserables.txt:4992:have escaped him something which might wound the man. By dint of
tests/les_miserables.txt:4993:reflection, I think I have comprehended what was passing in my
tests/les_miserables.txt:4999:understand charity well? Is there not, dear Madame, something truly
tests/les_miserables.txt:5000:evangelical in this delicacy which abstains from sermon, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:5002:a sore point, not to touch it at all? It has seemed to me that this
tests/les_miserables.txt:5003:might have been my brother’s private thought. In any case, what I can
tests/les_miserables.txt:5007:the same manner in which he would have supped with M. Gédéon le
tests/les_miserables.txt:5008:Prévost, or with the curate of the parish.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5010:“Towards the end, when he had reached the figs, there came a knock at
tests/les_miserables.txt:5012:brother kissed the child on the brow, and borrowed fifteen sous which I
tests/les_miserables.txt:5013:had about me to give to Mother Gerbaud. The man was not paying much
tests/les_miserables.txt:5015:much fatigued. After poor old Gerbaud had taken her departure, my
tests/les_miserables.txt:5016:brother said grace; then he turned to the man and said to him, ‘You
tests/les_miserables.txt:5017:must be in great need of your bed.’ Madame Magloire cleared the table
tests/les_miserables.txt:5020:sent Madame Magloire down a moment later, to carry to the man’s bed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5021:goat skin from the Black Forest, which was in my room. The nights are
tests/les_miserables.txt:5024:Germany, at Tottlingen, near the sources of the Danube, as well as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5025:little ivory-handled knife which I use at table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5028:drawing-room, where we hang up the linen, and then we each retired to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5029:our own chambers, without saying a word to each other.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:5039:the two silver candlesticks from the table, handed the other to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5042:“Monsieur, I will conduct you to your room.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:5048:was so arranged that in order to pass into the oratory where the alcove
tests/les_miserables.txt:5049:was situated, or to get out of it, it was necessary to traverse the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5052:At the moment when he was crossing this apartment, Madame Magloire was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5053:putting away the silverware in the cupboard near the head of the bed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5054:This was her last care every evening before she went to bed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5056:The Bishop installed his guest in the alcove. A fresh white bed had
tests/les_miserables.txt:5057:been prepared there. The man set the candle down on a small table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5060:before you set out, you shall drink a cup of warm milk from our cows.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:5065:Hardly had he pronounced these words full of peace, when all of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5066:sudden, and without transition, he made a strange movement, which would
tests/les_miserables.txt:5068:Even at this day it is difficult for us to explain what inspired him at
tests/les_miserables.txt:5069:that moment. Did he intend to convey a warning or to throw out a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5070:menace? Was he simply obeying a sort of instinctive impulse which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5071:obscure even to himself? He turned abruptly to the old man, folded his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5072:arms, and bending upon his host a savage gaze, he exclaimed in a hoarse
tests/les_miserables.txt:5073:voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:5075:“Ah! really! You lodge me in your house, close to yourself like this?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:5078:He broke off, and added with a laugh in which there lurked something
tests/les_miserables.txt:5081:“Have you really reflected well? How do you know that I have not been
tests/les_miserables.txt:5087:“That is the concern of the good God.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:5092:benediction on the man, who did not bow, and without turning his head
tests/les_miserables.txt:5095:When the alcove was in use, a large serge curtain drawn from wall to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5096:wall concealed the altar. The Bishop knelt before this curtain as he
tests/les_miserables.txt:5098:walking, meditating, contemplating, his heart and soul wholly absorbed
tests/les_miserables.txt:5099:in those grand and mysterious things which God shows at night to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5100:eyes which remain open.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5102:As for the man, he was actually so fatigued that he did not even profit
tests/les_miserables.txt:5103:by the nice white sheets. Snuffing out his candle with his nostrils
tests/les_miserables.txt:5104:after the manner of convicts, he dropped, all dressed as he was, upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:5107:Midnight struck as the Bishop returned from his garden to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5120:Jean Valjean came from a poor peasant family of Brie. He had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:5121:learned to read in his childhood. When he reached man’s estate, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:5122:became a tree-pruner at Faverolles. His mother was named Jeanne
tests/les_miserables.txt:5123:Mathieu; his father was called Jean Valjean or Vlajean, probably a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5124:sobriquet, and a contraction of _voilà_ Jean, “here’s Jean.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:5127:Jean Valjean was of that thoughtful but not gloomy disposition which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5128:constitutes the peculiarity of affectionate natures. On the whole,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5129:however, there was something decidedly sluggish and insignificant about
tests/les_miserables.txt:5130:Jean Valjean in appearance, at least. He had lost his father and mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:5131:at a very early age. His mother had died of a milk fever, which had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:5134:was a sister older than himself,—a widow with seven children, boys and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5138:The husband died. The eldest of the seven children was eight years old.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5142:father’s place, and, in his turn, supported the sister who had brought
tests/les_miserables.txt:5143:him up. This was done simply as a duty and even a little churlishly on
tests/les_miserables.txt:5150:his bowl while he was eating,—a bit of meat, a slice of bacon, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5151:heart of the cabbage,—to give to one of her children. As he went on
tests/les_miserables.txt:5153:long hair falling about his bowl and concealing his eyes, he had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5154:air of perceiving nothing and allowing it. There was at Faverolles, not
tests/les_miserables.txt:5155:far from the Valjean thatched cottage, on the other side of the lane, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5156:farmer’s wife named Marie-Claude; the Valjean children, habitually
tests/les_miserables.txt:5158:their mother’s name, which they drank behind a hedge or in some alley
tests/les_miserables.txt:5159:corner, snatching the jug from each other so hastily that the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:5160:girls spilled it on their aprons and down their necks. If their mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:5163:the pint of milk behind their mother’s back, and the children were not
tests/les_miserables.txt:5168:whatever he could. His sister worked also but what could she do with
tests/les_miserables.txt:5169:seven little children? It was a sad group enveloped in misery, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5170:was being gradually annihilated. A very hard winter came. Jean had no
tests/les_miserables.txt:5171:work. The family had no bread. No bread literally. Seven children!
tests/les_miserables.txt:5173:One Sunday evening, Maubert Isabeau, the baker on the Church Square at
tests/les_miserables.txt:5177:glass. The arm seized a loaf of bread and carried it off. Isabeau ran
tests/les_miserables.txt:5182:This took place in 1795. Jean Valjean was taken before the tribunals of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5184:night. He had a gun which he used better than any one else in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5185:world, he was a bit of a poacher, and this injured his case. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:5186:exists a legitimate prejudice against poachers. The poacher, like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5187:smuggler, smacks too strongly of the brigand. Nevertheless, we will
tests/les_miserables.txt:5188:remark cursorily, there is still an abyss between these races of men
tests/les_miserables.txt:5189:and the hideous assassin of the towns. The poacher lives in the forest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5190:the smuggler lives in the mountains or on the sea. The cities make
tests/les_miserables.txt:5191:ferocious men because they make corrupt men. The mountain, the sea, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5192:forest, make savage men; they develop the fierce side, but often
tests/les_miserables.txt:5195:Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty. The terms of the Code were
tests/les_miserables.txt:5196:explicit. There occur formidable hours in our civilization; there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:5197:moments when the penal laws decree a shipwreck. What an ominous minute
tests/les_miserables.txt:5198:is that in which society draws back and consummates the irreparable
tests/les_miserables.txt:5199:abandonment of a sentient being! Jean Valjean was condemned to five
tests/les_miserables.txt:5202:On the 22d of April, 1796, the victory of Montenotte, won by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5203:general-in-chief of the army of Italy, whom the message of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5204:Directory to the Five Hundred, of the 2d of Floréal, year IV., calls
tests/les_miserables.txt:5205:Buona-Parte, was announced in Paris; on that same day a great gang of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5206:galley-slaves was put in chains at Bicêtre. Jean Valjean formed a part
tests/les_miserables.txt:5208:years old, still recalls perfectly that unfortunate wretch who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5209:chained to the end of the fourth line, in the north angle of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5210:courtyard. He was seated on the ground like the others. He did not seem
tests/les_miserables.txt:5211:to comprehend his position, except that it was horrible. It is probable
tests/les_miserables.txt:5213:man, ignorant of everything, something excessive. While the bolt of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5214:iron collar was being riveted behind his head with heavy blows from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5215:hammer, he wept, his tears stifled him, they impeded his speech; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:5218:it gradually seven times, as though he were touching in succession
tests/les_miserables.txt:5220:that the thing which he had done, whatever it was, he had done for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5221:sake of clothing and nourishing seven little children.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5224:twenty-seven days, on a cart, with a chain on his neck. At Toulon he
tests/les_miserables.txt:5225:was clothed in the red cassock. All that had constituted his life, even
tests/les_miserables.txt:5226:to his name, was effaced; he was no longer even Jean Valjean; he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5227:number 24,601. What became of his sister? What became of the seven
tests/les_miserables.txt:5228:children? Who troubled himself about that? What becomes of the handful
tests/les_miserables.txt:5229:of leaves from the young tree which is sawed off at the root?
tests/les_miserables.txt:5231:It is always the same story. These poor living beings, these creatures
tests/les_miserables.txt:5232:of God, henceforth without support, without guide, without refuge,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5233:wandered away at random,—who even knows?—each in his own direction
tests/les_miserables.txt:5234:perhaps, and little by little buried themselves in that cold mist which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5235:engulfs solitary destinies; gloomy shades, into which disappear in
tests/les_miserables.txt:5236:succession so many unlucky heads, in the sombre march of the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:5237:race. They quitted the country. The clock-tower of what had been their
tests/les_miserables.txt:5239:forgot them; after a few years’ residence in the galleys, Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:5241:was a scar. That is all. Only once, during all the time which he spent
tests/les_miserables.txt:5243:towards the end of the fourth year of his captivity. I know not through
tests/les_miserables.txt:5244:what channels the news reached him. Some one who had known them in
tests/les_miserables.txt:5245:their own country had seen his sister. She was in Paris. She lived in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5246:poor street near Saint-Sulpice, in the Rue du Gindre. She had with her
tests/les_miserables.txt:5247:only one child, a little boy, the youngest. Where were the other six?
tests/les_miserables.txt:5249:office, No. 3 Rue du Sabot, where she was a folder and stitcher. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:5250:was obliged to be there at six o’clock in the morning—long before
tests/les_miserables.txt:5251:daylight in winter. In the same building with the printing office there
tests/les_miserables.txt:5252:was a school, and to this school she took her little boy, who was seven
tests/les_miserables.txt:5253:years old. But as she entered the printing office at six, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5254:school only opened at seven, the child had to wait in the courtyard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5255:for the school to open, for an hour—one hour of a winter night in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5256:open air! They would not allow the child to come into the printing
tests/les_miserables.txt:5257:office, because he was in the way, they said. When the workmen passed
tests/les_miserables.txt:5259:pavement, overcome with drowsiness, and often fast asleep in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5260:shadow, crouched down and doubled up over his basket. When it rained,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5262:den, where there was a pallet, a spinning-wheel, and two wooden chairs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5263:and the little one slumbered in a corner, pressing himself close to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5264:cat that he might suffer less from cold. At seven o’clock the school
tests/les_miserables.txt:5269:things whom he had loved; then all closed again. He heard nothing more
tests/les_miserables.txt:5270:forever. Nothing from them ever reached him again; he never beheld
tests/les_miserables.txt:5271:them; he never met them again; and in the continuation of this mournful
tests/les_miserables.txt:5274:Towards the end of this fourth year Jean Valjean’s turn to escape
tests/les_miserables.txt:5275:arrived. His comrades assisted him, as is the custom in that sad place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5276:He escaped. He wandered for two days in the fields at liberty, if being
tests/les_miserables.txt:5280:clock, of the day because one can see, of the night because one cannot
tests/les_miserables.txt:5282:of the second day he was captured. He had neither eaten nor slept for
tests/les_miserables.txt:5283:thirty-six hours. The maritime tribunal condemned him, for this crime,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5284:to a prolongation of his term for three years, which made eight years.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5285:In the sixth year his turn to escape occurred again; he availed himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:5286:of it, but could not accomplish his flight fully. He was missing at
tests/les_miserables.txt:5287:roll-call. The cannon were fired, and at night the patrol found him
tests/les_miserables.txt:5288:hidden under the keel of a vessel in process of construction; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:5289:resisted the galley guards who seized him. Escape and rebellion. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:5290:case, provided for by a special code, was punished by an addition of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5291:five years, two of them in the double chain. Thirteen years. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5292:tenth year his turn came round again; he again profited by it; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:5293:succeeded no better. Three years for this fresh attempt. Sixteen years.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5295:attempt, and only succeeded in getting retaken at the end of four hours
tests/les_miserables.txt:5296:of absence. Three years for those four hours. Nineteen years. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:5297:October, 1815, he was released; he had entered there in 1796, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:5300:Room for a brief parenthesis. This is the second time, during his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5302:this book has come across the theft of a loaf of bread as the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5304:Jean Valjean had stolen a loaf. English statistics prove the fact that
tests/les_miserables.txt:5306:cause.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5311:What had taken place in that soul?
tests/les_miserables.txt:5321:It is necessary that society should look at these things, because it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:5322:itself which creates them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5325:light of nature was ignited in him. Unhappiness, which also possesses a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5326:clearness of vision of its own, augmented the small amount of daylight
tests/les_miserables.txt:5327:which existed in this mind. Beneath the cudgel, beneath the chain, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:5328:the cell, in hardship, beneath the burning sun of the galleys, upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5329:plank bed of the convict, he withdrew into his own consciousness and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5332:He constituted himself the tribunal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5336:He recognized the fact that he was not an innocent man unjustly
tests/les_miserables.txt:5337:punished. He admitted that he had committed an extreme and blameworthy
tests/les_miserables.txt:5338:act; that that loaf of bread would probably not have been refused to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5339:him had he asked for it; that, in any case, it would have been better
tests/les_miserables.txt:5340:to wait until he could get it through compassion or through work; that
tests/les_miserables.txt:5342:hungry?” That, in the first place, it is very rare for any one to die
tests/les_miserables.txt:5344:is so constituted that he can suffer long and much, both morally and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5345:physically, without dying; that it is therefore necessary to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:5346:patience; that that would even have been better for those poor little
tests/les_miserables.txt:5347:children; that it had been an act of madness for him, a miserable,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5348:unfortunate wretch, to take society at large violently by the collar,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5349:and to imagine that one can escape from misery through theft; that that
tests/les_miserables.txt:5350:is in any case a poor door through which to escape from misery through
tests/les_miserables.txt:5351:which infamy enters; in short, that he was in the wrong.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5357:an industrious man, should have lacked bread. And whether, the fault
tests/les_miserables.txt:5358:once committed and confessed, the chastisement had not been ferocious
tests/les_miserables.txt:5360:of the law, in respect to the penalty, than there had been on the part
tests/les_miserables.txt:5361:of the culprit in respect to his fault. Whether there had not been an
tests/les_miserables.txt:5362:excess of weights in one balance of the scale, in the one which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5363:contains expiation. Whether the over-weight of the penalty was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:5364:equivalent to the annihilation of the crime, and did not result in
tests/les_miserables.txt:5365:reversing the situation, of replacing the fault of the delinquent by
tests/les_miserables.txt:5366:the fault of the repression, of converting the guilty man into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5367:victim, and the debtor into the creditor, and of ranging the law
tests/les_miserables.txt:5370:Whether this penalty, complicated by successive aggravations for
tests/les_miserables.txt:5371:attempts at escape, had not ended in becoming a sort of outrage
tests/les_miserables.txt:5372:perpetrated by the stronger upon the feebler, a crime of society
tests/les_miserables.txt:5373:against the individual, a crime which was being committed afresh every
tests/les_miserables.txt:5374:day, a crime which had lasted nineteen years.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5376:He asked himself whether human society could have the right to force
tests/les_miserables.txt:5377:its members to suffer equally in one case for its own unreasonable lack
tests/les_miserables.txt:5378:of foresight, and in the other case for its pitiless foresight; and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5379:seize a poor man forever between a defect and an excess, a default of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5380:work and an excess of punishment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5382:Whether it was not outrageous for society to treat thus precisely those
tests/les_miserables.txt:5384:made by chance, and consequently the most deserving of consideration.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5386:These questions put and answered, he judged society and condemned it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5388:He condemned it to his hatred.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5390:He made it responsible for the fate which he was suffering, and he said
tests/les_miserables.txt:5391:to himself that it might be that one day he should not hesitate to call
tests/les_miserables.txt:5392:it to account. He declared to himself that there was no equilibrium
tests/les_miserables.txt:5393:between the harm which he had caused and the harm which was being done
tests/les_miserables.txt:5394:to him; he finally arrived at the conclusion that his punishment was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5397:Anger may be both foolish and absurd; one can be irritated wrongfully;
tests/les_miserables.txt:5401:And besides, human society had done him nothing but harm; he had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:5402:seen anything of it save that angry face which it calls Justice, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5403:which it shows to those whom it strikes. Men had only touched him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5404:bruise him. Every contact with them had been a blow. Never, since his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5405:infancy, since the days of his mother, of his sister, had he ever
tests/les_miserables.txt:5406:encountered a friendly word and a kindly glance. From suffering to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5407:suffering, he had gradually arrived at the conviction that life is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5408:war; and that in this war he was the conquered. He had no other weapon
tests/les_miserables.txt:5412:There was at Toulon a school for the convicts, kept by the Ignorantin
tests/les_miserables.txt:5413:friars, where the most necessary branches were taught to those of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5415:mind. He went to school at the age of forty, and learned to read, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5416:write, to cipher. He felt that to fortify his intelligence was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5417:fortify his hate. In certain cases, education and enlightenment can
tests/les_miserables.txt:5420:This is a sad thing to say; after having judged society, which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:5421:caused his unhappiness, he judged Providence, which had made society,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5422:and he condemned it also.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5429:good when he arrived at the galleys. He there condemned society, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5430:felt that he was becoming wicked; he there condemned Providence, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5431:was conscious that he was becoming impious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5433:It is difficult not to indulge in meditation at this point.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5435:Does human nature thus change utterly and from top to bottom? Can the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5436:man created good by God be rendered wicked by man? Can the soul be
tests/les_miserables.txt:5437:completely made over by fate, and become evil, fate being evil? Can the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5438:heart become misshapen and contract incurable deformities and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5440:the vertebral column beneath too low a vault? Is there not in every
tests/les_miserables.txt:5441:human soul, was there not in the soul of Jean Valjean in particular, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5442:first spark, a divine element, incorruptible in this world, immortal in
tests/les_miserables.txt:5443:the other, which good can develop, fan, ignite, and make to glow with
tests/les_miserables.txt:5444:splendor, and which evil can never wholly extinguish?
tests/les_miserables.txt:5446:Grave and obscure questions, to the last of which every physiologist
tests/les_miserables.txt:5448:beheld at Toulon, during the hours of repose, which were for Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:5450:arms upon the bar of some capstan, with the end of his chain thrust
tests/les_miserables.txt:5451:into his pocket to prevent its dragging, serious, silent, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5452:thoughtful, a pariah of the laws which regarded the man with wrath,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5453:condemned by civilization, and regarding heaven with severity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5455:Certainly,—and we make no attempt to dissimulate the fact,—the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5457:would, perchance, have pitied this sick man, of the law’s making; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:5459:aside his gaze from the caverns of which he would have caught a glimpse
tests/les_miserables.txt:5461:effaced from this existence the word which the finger of God has,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5462:nevertheless, inscribed upon the brow of every man,—hope.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5464:Was this state of his soul, which we have attempted to analyze, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:5465:perfectly clear to Jean Valjean as we have tried to render it for those
tests/les_miserables.txt:5466:who read us? Did Jean Valjean distinctly perceive, after their
tests/les_miserables.txt:5467:formation, and had he seen distinctly during the process of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:5468:formation, all the elements of which his moral misery was composed? Had
tests/les_miserables.txt:5469:this rough and unlettered man gathered a perfectly clear perception of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5470:the succession of ideas through which he had, by degrees, mounted and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5471:descended to the lugubrious aspects which had, for so many years,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5472:formed the inner horizon of his spirit? Was he conscious of all that
tests/les_miserables.txt:5474:which we do not presume to state; it is something which we do not even
tests/les_miserables.txt:5475:believe. There was too much ignorance in Jean Valjean, even after his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5476:misfortune, to prevent much vagueness from still lingering there. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:5479:might have said that he hated in advance of himself. He dwelt
tests/les_miserables.txt:5481:dreamer. Only, at intervals, there suddenly came to him, from without
tests/les_miserables.txt:5482:and from within, an access of wrath, a surcharge of suffering, a livid
tests/les_miserables.txt:5483:and rapid flash which illuminated his whole soul, and caused to appear
tests/les_miserables.txt:5485:frightful light, the hideous precipices and the sombre perspective of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5488:The flash passed, the night closed in again; and where was he? He no
tests/les_miserables.txt:5489:longer knew. The peculiarity of pains of this nature, in which that
tests/les_miserables.txt:5490:which is pitiless—that is to say, that which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:5493:ferocious beast.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5495:Jean Valjean’s successive and obstinate attempts at escape would alone
tests/les_miserables.txt:5496:suffice to prove this strange working of the law upon the human soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5499:without reflecting for an instant on the result, nor on the experiences
tests/les_miserables.txt:5500:which he had already gone through. He escaped impetuously, like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5501:wolf who finds his cage open. Instinct said to him, “Flee!” Reason
tests/les_miserables.txt:5502:would have said, “Remain!” But in the presence of so violent a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5503:temptation, reason vanished; nothing remained but instinct. The beast
tests/les_miserables.txt:5504:alone acted. When he was recaptured, the fresh severities inflicted on
tests/les_miserables.txt:5507:One detail, which we must not omit, is that he possessed a physical
tests/les_miserables.txt:5508:strength which was not approached by a single one of the denizens of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5509:the galleys. At work, at paying out a cable or winding up a capstan,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5511:enormous weights on his back; and when the occasion demanded it, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:5512:replaced that implement which is called a jack-screw, and was formerly
tests/les_miserables.txt:5513:called _orgueil_ [pride], whence, we may remark in passing, is derived
tests/les_miserables.txt:5515:His comrades had nicknamed him Jean the Jack-screw. Once, when they
tests/les_miserables.txt:5516:were repairing the balcony of the town-hall at Toulon, one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:5517:admirable caryatids of Puget, which support the balcony, became
tests/les_miserables.txt:5519:present, supported the caryatid with his shoulder, and gave the workmen
tests/les_miserables.txt:5522:His suppleness even exceeded his strength. Certain convicts who were
tests/les_miserables.txt:5523:forever dreaming of escape, ended by making a veritable science of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5524:force and skill combined. It is the science of muscles. An entire
tests/les_miserables.txt:5525:system of mysterious statics is daily practised by prisoners, men who
tests/les_miserables.txt:5526:are forever envious of the flies and birds. To climb a vertical
tests/les_miserables.txt:5527:surface, and to find points of support where hardly a projection was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5529:with the tension of his back and legs, with his elbows and his heels
tests/les_miserables.txt:5531:magic to the third story. He sometimes mounted thus even to the roof of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5534:He spoke but little. He laughed not at all. An excessive emotion was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5535:required to wring from him, once or twice a year, that lugubrious laugh
tests/les_miserables.txt:5536:of the convict, which is like the echo of the laugh of a demon. To all
tests/les_miserables.txt:5537:appearance, he seemed to be occupied in the constant contemplation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5540:He was absorbed, in fact.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5542:Athwart the unhealthy perceptions of an incomplete nature and a crushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:5543:intelligence, he was confusedly conscious that some monstrous thing was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5544:resting on him. In that obscure and wan shadow within which he crawled,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5545:each time that he turned his neck and essayed to raise his glance, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:5546:perceived with terror, mingled with rage, a sort of frightful
tests/les_miserables.txt:5547:accumulation of things, collecting and mounting above him, beyond the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5548:range of his vision,—laws, prejudices, men, and deeds,—whose outlines
tests/les_miserables.txt:5549:escaped him, whose mass terrified him, and which was nothing else than
tests/les_miserables.txt:5550:that prodigious pyramid which we call civilization. He distinguished,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5552:afar off and on inaccessible table-lands, some group, some detail,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5553:vividly illuminated; here the galley-sergeant and his cudgel; there the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5554:gendarme and his sword; yonder the mitred archbishop; away at the top,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5555:like a sort of sun, the Emperor, crowned and dazzling. It seemed to him
tests/les_miserables.txt:5557:it more funereal and more black. All this—laws, prejudices, deeds, men,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5558:things—went and came above him, over his head, in accordance with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5559:complicated and mysterious movement which God imparts to civilization,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5560:walking over him and crushing him with I know not what peacefulness in
tests/les_miserables.txt:5561:its cruelty and inexorability in its indifference. Souls which have
tests/les_miserables.txt:5563:the lowest of those limbos at which no one any longer looks, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5564:reproved of the law, feel the whole weight of this human society, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:5568:In this situation Jean Valjean meditated; and what could be the nature
tests/les_miserables.txt:5572:doubtless, think that same thing which Jean Valjean thought.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5574:All these things, realities full of spectres, phantasmagories full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5575:realities, had eventually created for him a sort of interior state
tests/les_miserables.txt:5576:which is almost indescribable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5578:At times, amid his convict toil, he paused. He fell to thinking. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:5580:rose in revolt. Everything which had happened to him seemed to him
tests/les_miserables.txt:5583:standing a few paces from him; the galley-sergeant seemed a phantom to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5584:him. All of a sudden the phantom dealt him a blow with his cudgel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5591:To sum up, in conclusion, that which can be summed up and translated
tests/les_miserables.txt:5593:confine ourselves to the statement that, in the course of nineteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:5595:formidable convict of Toulon, had become capable, thanks to the manner
tests/les_miserables.txt:5596:in which the galleys had moulded him, of two sorts of evil action:
tests/les_miserables.txt:5597:firstly, of evil action which was rapid, unpremeditated, dashing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5598:entirely instinctive, in the nature of reprisals for the evil which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:5599:had undergone; secondly, of evil action which was serious, grave,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5600:consciously argued out and premeditated, with the false ideas which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5601:such a misfortune can furnish. His deliberate deeds passed through
tests/les_miserables.txt:5602:three successive phases, which natures of a certain stamp can alone
tests/les_miserables.txt:5603:traverse,—reasoning, will, perseverance. He had for moving causes his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5605:suffered, the reaction even against the good, the innocent, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5606:just, if there are any such. The point of departure, like the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5608:which, if it be not arrested in its development by some providential
tests/les_miserables.txt:5609:incident, becomes, within a given time, the hatred of society, then the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5610:hatred of the human race, then the hatred of creation, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5611:manifests itself by a vague, incessant, and brutal desire to do harm to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5612:some living being, no matter whom. It will be perceived that it was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:5613:without reason that Jean Valjean’s passport described him as _a very
tests/les_miserables.txt:5618:the galleys it had been nineteen years since he had shed a tear.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5629:ship has a path which it is forced to pursue. It passes on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5632:surface; he calls, he stretches out his arms; he is not heard. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:5633:vessel, trembling under the hurricane, is wholly absorbed in its own
tests/les_miserables.txt:5635:his miserable head is but a speck amid the immensity of the waves. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:5636:gives vent to desperate cries from out of the depths. What a spectre is
tests/les_miserables.txt:5637:that retreating sail! He gazes and gazes at it frantically. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:5639:now, he was one of the crew, he went and came along the deck with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5641:Now, what has taken place? He has slipped, he has fallen; all is at an
tests/les_miserables.txt:5645:and crumbles. The billows, torn and lashed by the wind, encompass him
tests/les_miserables.txt:5647:water dash over his head; a populace of waves spits upon him; confused
tests/les_miserables.txt:5648:openings half devour him; every time that he sinks, he catches glimpses
tests/les_miserables.txt:5649:of precipices filled with night; frightful and unknown vegetations
tests/les_miserables.txt:5650:seize him, knot about his feet, draw him to them; he is conscious that
tests/les_miserables.txt:5651:he is becoming an abyss, that he forms part of the foam; the waves toss
tests/les_miserables.txt:5652:him from one to another; he drinks in the bitterness; the cowardly
tests/les_miserables.txt:5653:ocean attacks him furiously, to drown him; the enormity plays with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5660:combats the inexhaustible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5666:eyes and beholds only the lividness of the clouds. He witnesses, amid
tests/les_miserables.txt:5668:madness; he hears noises strange to man, which seem to come from beyond
tests/les_miserables.txt:5672:There are birds in the clouds, just as there are angels above human
tests/les_miserables.txt:5673:distresses; but what can they do for him? They sing and fly and float,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5676:He feels himself buried in those two infinities, the ocean and the sky,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5679:Night descends; he has been swimming for hours; his strength is
tests/les_miserables.txt:5680:exhausted; that ship, that distant thing in which there were men, has
tests/les_miserables.txt:5692:deaf. He beseeches the tempest; the imperturbable tempest obeys only
tests/les_miserables.txt:5696:the undefined curling of those wild waters. In him horror and fatigue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5698:adventures of the corpse in the limitless shadow. The bottomless cold
tests/les_miserables.txt:5699:paralyzes him. His hands contract convulsively; they close, and grasp
tests/les_miserables.txt:5700:nothingness. Winds, clouds, whirlwinds, gusts, useless stars! What is
tests/les_miserables.txt:5701:to be done? The desperate man gives up; he is weary, he chooses the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5706:Oh, implacable march of human societies! Oh, losses of men and of souls
tests/les_miserables.txt:5707:on the way! Ocean into which falls all that the law lets slip!
tests/les_miserables.txt:5708:Disastrous absence of help! Oh, moral death!
tests/les_miserables.txt:5710:The sea is the inexorable social night into which the penal laws fling
tests/les_miserables.txt:5711:their condemned. The sea is the immensity of wretchedness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5713:The soul, going downstream in this gulf, may become a corpse. Who shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:5714:resuscitate it?
tests/les_miserables.txt:5722:When the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:5724:moment seemed improbable and unprecedented; a ray of vivid light, a ray
tests/les_miserables.txt:5728:perceived what sort of liberty it is to which a yellow passport is
tests/les_miserables.txt:5731:And this was encompassed with much bitterness. He had calculated that
tests/les_miserables.txt:5733:hundred and seventy-one francs. It is but just to add that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:5734:forgotten to include in his calculations the forced repose of Sundays
tests/les_miserables.txt:5735:and festival days during nineteen years, which entailed a diminution of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5736:about eighty francs. At all events, his hoard had been reduced by
tests/les_miserables.txt:5737:various local levies to the sum of one hundred and nine francs fifteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:5738:sous, which had been counted out to him on his departure. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:5744:offered his services. Business was pressing; they were accepted. He set
tests/les_miserables.txt:5747:observed him, and demanded his papers. It was necessary to show him the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5750:which they earned each day at this occupation; he had been told _thirty
tests/les_miserables.txt:5751:sous_. When evening arrived, as he was forced to set out again on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5754:fifteen sous. He objected. He was told, _“That is enough for thee.”_ He
tests/les_miserables.txt:5758:There, again, he considered that he had been robbed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5760:Society, the State, by diminishing his hoard, had robbed him wholesale.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5763:Liberation is not deliverance. One gets free from the galleys, but not
tests/les_miserables.txt:5764:from the sentence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5767:was received at D——
tests/les_miserables.txt:5775:As the Cathedral clock struck two in the morning, Jean Valjean awoke.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5778:since he had slept in a bed, and, although he had not undressed, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5782:accustomed not to devote many hours to repose.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5784:He opened his eyes and stared into the gloom which surrounded him; then
tests/les_miserables.txt:5785:he closed them again, with the intention of going to sleep once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5788:preoccupy the mind, one falls asleep once, but not a second time. Sleep
tests/les_miserables.txt:5789:comes more easily than it returns. This is what happened to Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:5790:Valjean. He could not get to sleep again, and he fell to thinking.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5792:He was at one of those moments when the thoughts which one has in one’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:5793:mind are troubled. There was a sort of dark confusion in his brain. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:5795:pell-mell and mingled confusedly, losing their proper forms, becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:5797:perturbed pool. Many thoughts occurred to him; but there was one which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5798:kept constantly presenting itself afresh, and which drove away all
tests/les_miserables.txt:5799:others. We will mention this thought at once: he had observed the six
tests/les_miserables.txt:5800:sets of silver forks and spoons and the ladle which Madame Magloire had
tests/les_miserables.txt:5801:placed on the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5803:Those six sets of silver haunted him.—They were there.—A few paces
tests/les_miserables.txt:5804:distant.—Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach the one
tests/les_miserables.txt:5805:in which he then was, the old servant-woman had been in the act of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5806:placing them in a little cupboard near the head of the bed.—He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:5807:taken careful note of this cupboard.—On the right, as you entered from
tests/les_miserables.txt:5809:could get at least two hundred francs.—Double what he had earned in
tests/les_miserables.txt:5814:His mind wavered for a whole hour in fluctuations with which there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5815:certainly mingled some struggle. Three o’clock struck. He opened his
tests/les_miserables.txt:5816:eyes again, drew himself up abruptly into a sitting posture, stretched
tests/les_miserables.txt:5817:out his arm and felt of his knapsack, which he had thrown down on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5818:corner of the alcove; then he hung his legs over the edge of the bed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5819:and placed his feet on the floor, and thus found himself, almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:5822:He remained for a time thoughtfully in this attitude, which would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:5825:sleeping. All of a sudden he stooped down, removed his shoes and placed
tests/les_miserables.txt:5827:attitude, and became motionless once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5829:Throughout this hideous meditation, the thoughts which we have above
tests/les_miserables.txt:5830:indicated moved incessantly through his brain; entered, withdrew,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5832:without knowing why, and with the mechanical persistence of reverie, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5833:a convict named Brevet, whom he had known in the galleys, and whose
tests/les_miserables.txt:5834:trousers had been upheld by a single suspender of knitted cotton. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:5835:checkered pattern of that suspender recurred incessantly to his mind.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5838:even until daybreak, had not the clock struck one—the half or quarter
tests/les_miserables.txt:5844:steps, to the window, of which he caught a glimpse. The night was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:5845:very dark; there was a full moon, across which coursed large clouds
tests/les_miserables.txt:5846:driven by the wind. This created, outdoors, alternate shadow and gleams
tests/les_miserables.txt:5847:of light, eclipses, then bright openings of the clouds; and indoors a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5848:sort of twilight. This twilight, sufficient to enable a person to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:5849:his way, intermittent on account of the clouds, resembled the sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5850:livid light which falls through an air-hole in a cellar, before which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5851:the passers-by come and go. On arriving at the window, Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:5853:fastened, according to the fashion of the country, only by a small pin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5854:He opened it; but as a rush of cold and piercing air penetrated the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5855:room abruptly, he closed it again immediately. He scrutinized the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5856:garden with that attentive gaze which studies rather than looks. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:5857:garden was enclosed by a tolerably low white wall, easy to climb. Far
tests/les_miserables.txt:5858:away, at the extremity, he perceived tops of trees, spaced at regular
tests/les_miserables.txt:5859:intervals, which indicated that the wall separated the garden from an
tests/les_miserables.txt:5862:Having taken this survey, he executed a movement like that of a man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:5863:has made up his mind, strode to his alcove, grasped his knapsack,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5864:opened it, fumbled in it, pulled out of it something which he placed on
tests/les_miserables.txt:5865:the bed, put his shoes into one of his pockets, shut the whole thing up
tests/les_miserables.txt:5866:again, threw the knapsack on his shoulders, put on his cap, drew the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5867:visor down over his eyes, felt for his cudgel, went and placed it in
tests/les_miserables.txt:5869:seized the object which he had deposited there. It resembled a short
tests/les_miserables.txt:5871:difficult to distinguish in that darkness for what employment that bit
tests/les_miserables.txt:5872:of iron could have been designed. Perhaps it was a lever; possibly it
tests/les_miserables.txt:5873:was a club.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5875:In the daytime it would have been possible to recognize it as nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:5876:more than a miner’s candlestick. Convicts were, at that period,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5877:sometimes employed in quarrying stone from the lofty hills which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5879:their command. These miners’ candlesticks are of massive iron,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5880:terminated at the lower extremity by a point, by means of which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:5881:are stuck into the rock.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5883:He took the candlestick in his right hand; holding his breath and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5884:trying to deaden the sound of his tread, he directed his steps to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5885:door of the adjoining room, occupied by the Bishop, as we already know.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5887:On arriving at this door, he found it ajar. The Bishop had not closed
tests/les_miserables.txt:5901:furtive and uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desirous of entering.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5903:The door yielded to this pressure, and made an imperceptible and silent
tests/les_miserables.txt:5904:movement, which enlarged the opening a little.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5906:He waited a moment; then gave the door a second and a bolder push.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5908:It continued to yield in silence. The opening was now large enough to
tests/les_miserables.txt:5909:allow him to pass. But near the door there stood a little table, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:5910:formed an embarrassing angle with it, and barred the entrance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5912:Jean Valjean recognized the difficulty. It was necessary, at any cost,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5915:He decided on his course of action, and gave the door a third push,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5916:more energetic than the two preceding. This time a badly oiled hinge
tests/les_miserables.txt:5917:suddenly emitted amid the silence a hoarse and prolonged cry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5920:something of the piercing and formidable sound of the trump of the Day
tests/les_miserables.txt:5923:In the fantastic exaggerations of the first moment he almost imagined
tests/les_miserables.txt:5924:that that hinge had just become animated, and had suddenly assumed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5927:bewildered, and fell back from the tips of his toes upon his heels. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:5930:of the wind issuing from a cavern. It seemed impossible to him that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5931:horrible clamor of that irritated hinge should not have disturbed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:5932:entire household, like the shock of an earthquake; the door, pushed by
tests/les_miserables.txt:5934:once; the two old women would shriek out; people would come to their
tests/les_miserables.txt:5935:assistance; in less than a quarter of an hour the town would be in an
tests/les_miserables.txt:5947:himself lost, he had not drawn back. His only thought now was to finish
tests/les_miserables.txt:5950:This room was in a state of perfect calm. Here and there vague and
tests/les_miserables.txt:5951:confused forms were distinguishable, which in the daylight were papers
tests/les_miserables.txt:5952:scattered on a table, open folios, volumes piled upon a stool, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:5953:armchair heaped with clothing, a prie-Dieu, and which at that hour were
tests/les_miserables.txt:5954:only shadowy corners and whitish spots. Jean Valjean advanced with
tests/les_miserables.txt:5955:precaution, taking care not to knock against the furniture. He could
tests/les_miserables.txt:5959:He suddenly came to a halt. He was near the bed. He had arrived there
tests/les_miserables.txt:5962:Nature sometimes mingles her effects and her spectacles with our
tests/les_miserables.txt:5963:actions with sombre and intelligent appropriateness, as though she
tests/les_miserables.txt:5964:desired to make us reflect. For the last half-hour a large cloud had
tests/les_miserables.txt:5965:covered the heavens. At the moment when Jean Valjean paused in front of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5966:the bed, this cloud parted, as though on purpose, and a ray of light,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5968:face. He was sleeping peacefully. He lay in his bed almost completely
tests/les_miserables.txt:5969:dressed, on account of the cold of the Basses-Alps, in a garment of
tests/les_miserables.txt:5970:brown wool, which covered his arms to the wrists. His head was thrown
tests/les_miserables.txt:5971:back on the pillow, in the careless attitude of repose; his hand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5972:adorned with the pastoral ring, and whence had fallen so many good
tests/les_miserables.txt:5973:deeds and so many holy actions, was hanging over the edge of the bed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5974:His whole face was illumined with a vague expression of satisfaction,
tests/les_miserables.txt:5975:of hope, and of felicity. It was more than a smile, and almost a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5976:radiance. He bore upon his brow the indescribable reflection of a light
tests/les_miserables.txt:5977:which was invisible. The soul of the just contemplates in sleep a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5980:A reflection of that heaven rested on the Bishop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5982:It was, at the same time, a luminous transparency, for that heaven was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5983:within him. That heaven was his conscience.
tests/les_miserables.txt:5988:upon that inward radiance, the sleeping Bishop seemed as in a glory. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:5991:that house which was so calm, the hour, the moment, the silence, added
tests/les_miserables.txt:5993:man, and enveloped in a sort of serene and majestic aureole that white
tests/les_miserables.txt:5994:hair, those closed eyes, that face in which all was hope and all was
tests/les_miserables.txt:5995:confidence, that head of an old man, and that slumber of an infant.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6001:candlestick in his hand, frightened by this luminous old man. Never had
tests/les_miserables.txt:6002:he beheld anything like this. This confidence terrified him. The moral
tests/les_miserables.txt:6003:world has no grander spectacle than this: a troubled and uneasy
tests/les_miserables.txt:6004:conscience, which has arrived on the brink of an evil action,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6005:contemplating the slumber of the just.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6008:about it something sublime, of which he was vaguely but imperiously
tests/les_miserables.txt:6009:conscious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6011:No one could have told what was passing within him, not even himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6012:In order to attempt to form an idea of it, it is necessary to think of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6013:the most violent of things in the presence of the most gentle. Even on
tests/les_miserables.txt:6015:certainty. It was a sort of haggard astonishment. He gazed at it, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6017:to divine it. What was evident was, that he was touched and astounded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6020:His eye never quitted the old man. The only thing which was clearly to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6022:indecision. One would have said that he was hesitating between the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:6023:abysses,—the one in which one loses one’s self and that in which one
tests/les_miserables.txt:6024:saves one’s self. He seemed prepared to crush that skull or to kiss
tests/les_miserables.txt:6028:brow, and he took off his cap; then his arm fell back with the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:6029:deliberation, and Jean Valjean fell to meditating once more, his cap in
tests/les_miserables.txt:6030:his left hand, his club in his right hand, his hair bristling all over
tests/les_miserables.txt:6033:The Bishop continued to sleep in profound peace beneath that terrifying
tests/les_miserables.txt:6036:The gleam of the moon rendered confusedly visible the crucifix over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6037:chimney-piece, which seemed to be extending its arms to both of them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6038:with a benediction for one and pardon for the other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6040:Suddenly Jean Valjean replaced his cap on his brow; then stepped
tests/les_miserables.txt:6041:rapidly past the bed, without glancing at the Bishop, straight to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6042:cupboard, which he saw near the head; he raised his iron candlestick as
tests/les_miserables.txt:6043:though to force the lock; the key was there; he opened it; the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:6044:thing which presented itself to him was the basket of silverware; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:6045:seized it, traversed the chamber with long strides, without taking any
tests/les_miserables.txt:6046:precautions and without troubling himself about the noise, gained the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6047:door, re-entered the oratory, opened the window, seized his cudgel,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6049:knapsack, threw away the basket, crossed the garden, leaped over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6059:garden. Madame Magloire ran up to him in utter consternation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6061:“Monseigneur, Monseigneur!” she exclaimed, “does your Grace know where
tests/les_miserables.txt:6068:become of it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6071:The Bishop had just picked up the basket in a flower-bed. He presented
tests/les_miserables.txt:6080:“Ah,” returned the Bishop, “so it is the silver which troubles you? I
tests/les_miserables.txt:6088:In a twinkling, with all the vivacity of an alert old woman, Madame
tests/les_miserables.txt:6089:Magloire had rushed to the oratory, entered the alcove, and returned to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6091:examined a plant of cochlearia des Guillons, which the basket had
tests/les_miserables.txt:6092:broken as it fell across the bed. He rose up at Madame Magloire’s cry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6097:As she uttered this exclamation, her eyes fell upon a corner of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6098:garden, where traces of the wall having been scaled were visible. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:6099:coping of the wall had been torn away.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6101:“Stay! yonder is the way he went. He jumped over into Cochefilet Lane.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6108:“And, in the first place, was that silver ours?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6111:Madame Magloire was speechless. Another silence ensued; then the Bishop
tests/les_miserables.txt:6120:for Mademoiselle’s. It makes no difference to us. But it is for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6126:“Ah, come! Are there no such things as pewter forks and spoons?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6137:Madame Magloire made an expressive grimace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6145:A few moments later he was breakfasting at the very table at which Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:6147:Monseigneur Welcome remarked gayly to his sister, who said nothing, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6150:of bread in a cup of milk.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6153:and came, “to take in a man like that! and to lodge him close to one’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:6158:As the brother and sister were about to rise from the table, there came
tests/les_miserables.txt:6159:a knock at the door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6163:The door opened. A singular and violent group made its appearance on
tests/les_miserables.txt:6164:the threshold. Three men were holding a fourth man by the collar. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:6167:A brigadier of gendarmes, who seemed to be in command of the group, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6168:standing near the door. He entered and advanced to the Bishop, making a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6173:At this word, Jean Valjean, who was dejected and seemed overwhelmed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6174:raised his head with an air of stupefaction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6176:“Monseigneur!” he murmured. “So he is not the curé?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6179:“Silence!” said the gendarme. “He is Monseigneur the Bishop.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6182:In the meantime, Monseigneur Bienvenu had advanced as quickly as his
tests/les_miserables.txt:6185:“Ah! here you are!” he exclaimed, looking at Jean Valjean. “I am glad
tests/les_miserables.txt:6186:to see you. Well, but how is this? I gave you the candlesticks too,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6187:which are of silver like the rest, and for which you can certainly get
tests/les_miserables.txt:6188:two hundred francs. Why did you not carry them away with your forks and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6193:with an expression which no human tongue can render any account of.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6196:is true, then? We came across him. He was walking like a man who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:6204:back here? It is a mistake.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6207:“In that case,” replied the brigadier, “we can let him go?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6212:The gendarmes released Jean Valjean, who recoiled.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6215:inarticulate voice, and as though he were talking in his sleep.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6221:candlesticks. Take them.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6224:He stepped to the chimney-piece, took the two silver candlesticks, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6226:a word, without a gesture, without a look which could disconcert the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6229:Jean Valjean was trembling in every limb. He took the two candlesticks
tests/les_miserables.txt:6230:mechanically, and with a bewildered air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6232:“Now,” said the Bishop, “go in peace. By the way, when you return, my
tests/les_miserables.txt:6233:friend, it is not necessary to pass through the garden. You can always
tests/les_miserables.txt:6235:anything but a latch, either by day or by night.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6247:The Bishop drew near to him, and said in a low voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:6250:in becoming an honest man.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6253:Jean Valjean, who had no recollection of ever having promised anything,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6254:remained speechless. The Bishop had emphasized the words when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:6258:It is your soul that I buy from you; I withdraw it from black thoughts
tests/les_miserables.txt:6269:out at a very hasty pace through the fields, taking whatever roads and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6270:paths presented themselves to him, without perceiving that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6271:incessantly retracing his steps. He wandered thus the whole morning,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6273:prey of a throng of novel sensations. He was conscious of a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6274:rage; he did not know against whom it was directed. He could not have
tests/les_miserables.txt:6275:told whether he was touched or humiliated. There came over him at
tests/les_miserables.txt:6276:moments a strange emotion which he resisted and to which he opposed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6277:hardness acquired during the last twenty years of his life. This state
tests/les_miserables.txt:6278:of mind fatigued him. He perceived with dismay that the sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6279:frightful calm which the injustice of his misfortune had conferred upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:6280:him was giving way within him. He asked himself what would replace
tests/les_miserables.txt:6281:this. At times he would have actually preferred to be in prison with
tests/les_miserables.txt:6284:advanced, there were still a few late flowers in the hedge-rows here
tests/les_miserables.txt:6285:and there, whose odor as he passed through them in his march recalled
tests/les_miserables.txt:6286:to him memories of his childhood. These memories were almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:6287:intolerable to him, it was so long since they had recurred to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6291:As the sun declined to its setting, casting long shadows athwart the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6293:large ruddy plain, which was absolutely deserted. There was nothing on
tests/les_miserables.txt:6294:the horizon except the Alps. Not even the spire of a distant village.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6296:which intersected the plain passed a few paces from the bush.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6298:In the middle of this meditation, which would have contributed not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6300:encountered him, a joyous sound became audible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6303:coming up the path and singing, his hurdy-gurdy on his hip, and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:6304:marmot-box on his back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6306:One of those gay and gentle children, who go from land to land
tests/les_miserables.txt:6309:Without stopping his song, the lad halted in his march from time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6310:time, and played at knuckle-bones with some coins which he had in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:6313:Among this money there was one forty-sou piece.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6315:The child halted beside the bush, without perceiving Jean Valjean, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6316:tossed up his handful of sous, which, up to that time, he had caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:6317:with a good deal of adroitness on the back of his hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6319:This time the forty-sou piece escaped him, and went rolling towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6320:brushwood until it reached Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6324:In the meantime, the child had looked after his coin and had caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:6329:The spot was absolutely solitary. As far as the eye could see there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6331:feeble cries of a flock of birds of passage, which was traversing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6332:heavens at an immense height. The child was standing with his back to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6333:the sun, which cast threads of gold in his hair and empurpled with its
tests/les_miserables.txt:6334:blood-red gleam the savage face of Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6336:“Sir,” said the little Savoyard, with that childish confidence which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:6337:composed of ignorance and innocence, “my money.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6347:“Sir,” resumed the child, “give me back my money.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6352:The child began again, “My money, sir.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6357:“My piece of money!” cried the child, “my white piece! my silver!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6360:It seemed as though Jean Valjean did not hear him. The child grasped
tests/les_miserables.txt:6361:him by the collar of his blouse and shook him. At the same time he made
tests/les_miserables.txt:6362:an effort to displace the big iron-shod shoe which rested on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:6365:“I want my piece of money! my piece of forty sous!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6368:The child wept. Jean Valjean raised his head. He still remained seated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6369:His eyes were troubled. He gazed at the child, in a sort of amazement,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6370:then he stretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6371:terrible voice, “Who’s there?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6374:“I, sir,” replied the child. “Little Gervais! I! Give me back my forty
tests/les_miserables.txt:6378:Then irritated, though he was so small, and becoming almost menacing:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:6385:feet, his foot still resting on the silver piece, he added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:6390:The frightened child looked at him, then began to tremble from head to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6392:of his speed, without daring to turn his neck or to utter a cry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6394:Nevertheless, lack of breath forced him to halt after a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:6395:distance, and Jean Valjean heard him sobbing, in the midst of his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:6398:At the end of a few moments the child had disappeared.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6402:The shadows were descending around Jean Valjean. He had eaten nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:6405:He had remained standing and had not changed his attitude after the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6406:child’s flight. The breath heaved his chest at long and irregular
tests/les_miserables.txt:6407:intervals. His gaze, fixed ten or twelve paces in front of him, seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:6408:to be scrutinizing with profound attention the shape of an ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:6409:fragment of blue earthenware which had fallen in the grass. All at once
tests/les_miserables.txt:6410:he shivered; he had just begun to feel the chill of evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6412:He settled his cap more firmly on his brow, sought mechanically to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6413:cross and button his blouse, advanced a step and stopped to pick up his
tests/les_miserables.txt:6414:cudgel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6416:At that moment he caught sight of the forty-sou piece, which his foot
tests/les_miserables.txt:6417:had half ground into the earth, and which was shining among the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6418:pebbles. It was as though he had received a galvanic shock. “What is
tests/les_miserables.txt:6419:this?” he muttered between his teeth. He recoiled three paces, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:6420:halted, without being able to detach his gaze from the spot which his
tests/les_miserables.txt:6421:foot had trodden but an instant before, as though the thing which lay
tests/les_miserables.txt:6424:At the expiration of a few moments he darted convulsively towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6425:silver coin, seized it, and straightened himself up again and began to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6426:gaze afar off over the plain, at the same time casting his eyes towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:6427:all points of the horizon, as he stood there erect and shivering, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:6428:a terrified wild animal which is seeking refuge.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6430:He saw nothing. Night was falling, the plain was cold and vague, great
tests/les_miserables.txt:6433:He said, “Ah!” and set out rapidly in the direction in which the child
tests/les_miserables.txt:6434:had disappeared. After about thirty paces he paused, looked about him
tests/les_miserables.txt:6446:The landscape was gloomy and deserted. He was encompassed by space.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6447:There was nothing around him but an obscurity in which his gaze was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6448:lost, and a silence which engulfed his voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6450:An icy north wind was blowing, and imparted to things around him a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:6452:incredible fury. One would have said that they were threatening and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6455:He set out on his march again, then he began to run; and from time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6456:time he halted and shouted into that solitude, with a voice which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6457:the most formidable and the most disconsolate that it was possible to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6461:Assuredly, if the child had heard him, he would have been alarmed and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6462:would have taken good care not to show himself. But the child was no
tests/les_miserables.txt:6465:He encountered a priest on horseback. He stepped up to him and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:6467:“Monsieur le Curé, have you seen a child pass?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6478:He drew two five-franc pieces from his money-bag and handed them to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6492:“If he is like what you say, my friend, he is a little stranger. Such
tests/les_miserables.txt:6496:Jean Valjean seized two more coins of five francs each with violence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6506:The priest put spurs to his horse and fled in haste, much alarmed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6508:Jean Valjean set out on a run, in the direction which he had first
tests/les_miserables.txt:6511:In this way he traversed a tolerably long distance, gazing, calling,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6512:shouting, but he met no one. Two or three times he ran across the plain
tests/les_miserables.txt:6513:towards something which conveyed to him the effect of a human being
tests/les_miserables.txt:6514:reclining or crouching down; it turned out to be nothing but brushwood
tests/les_miserables.txt:6515:or rocks nearly on a level with the earth. At length, at a spot where
tests/les_miserables.txt:6516:three paths intersected each other, he stopped. The moon had risen. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:6517:sent his gaze into the distance and shouted for the last time, “Little
tests/les_miserables.txt:6519:mist, without even awakening an echo. He murmured yet once more,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6520:“Little Gervais!” but in a feeble and almost inarticulate voice. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6523:evil conscience; he fell exhausted, on a large stone, his fists
tests/les_miserables.txt:6524:clenched in his hair and his face on his knees, and he cried, “I am a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6525:wretch!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6528:Then his heart burst, and he began to cry. It was the first time that
tests/les_miserables.txt:6533:could not yield to the evidence of what was going on within him. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:6534:hardened himself against the angelic action and the gentle words of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6535:old man. “You have promised me to become an honest man. I buy your
tests/les_miserables.txt:6540:This recurred to his mind unceasingly. To this celestial kindness he
tests/les_miserables.txt:6541:opposed pride, which is the fortress of evil within us. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6542:indistinctly conscious that the pardon of this priest was the greatest
tests/les_miserables.txt:6543:assault and the most formidable attack which had moved him yet; that
tests/les_miserables.txt:6544:his obduracy was finally settled if he resisted this clemency; that if
tests/les_miserables.txt:6545:he yielded, he should be obliged to renounce that hatred with which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6546:actions of other men had filled his soul through so many years, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6547:which pleased him; that this time it was necessary to conquer or to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:6548:conquered; and that a struggle, a colossal and final struggle, had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:6549:begun between his viciousness and the goodness of that man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6551:In the presence of these lights, he proceeded like a man who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:6552:intoxicated. As he walked thus with haggard eyes, did he have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6553:distinct perception of what might result to him from his adventure at
tests/les_miserables.txt:6554:D——? Did he understand all those mysterious murmurs which warn or
tests/les_miserables.txt:6555:importune the spirit at certain moments of life? Did a voice whisper in
tests/les_miserables.txt:6557:there no longer remained a middle course for him; that if he were not
tests/les_miserables.txt:6558:henceforth the best of men, he would be the worst; that it behooved him
tests/les_miserables.txt:6560:the convict; that if he wished to become good he must become an angel;
tests/les_miserables.txt:6561:that if he wished to remain evil, he must become a monster?
tests/les_miserables.txt:6563:Here, again, some questions must be put, which we have already put to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6564:ourselves elsewhere: did he catch some shadow of all this in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:6565:thought, in a confused way? Misfortune certainly, as we have said, does
tests/les_miserables.txt:6566:form the education of the intelligence; nevertheless, it is doubtful
tests/les_miserables.txt:6567:whether Jean Valjean was in a condition to disentangle all that we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:6568:here indicated. If these ideas occurred to him, he but caught glimpses
tests/les_miserables.txt:6569:of, rather than saw them, and they only succeeded in throwing him into
tests/les_miserables.txt:6571:that black and deformed thing which is called the galleys, the Bishop
tests/les_miserables.txt:6573:emerging from the dark. The future life, the possible life which
tests/les_miserables.txt:6574:offered itself to him henceforth, all pure and radiant, filled him with
tests/les_miserables.txt:6576:owl, who should suddenly see the sun rise, the convict had been dazzled
tests/les_miserables.txt:6579:That which was certain, that which he did not doubt, was that he was no
tests/les_miserables.txt:6580:longer the same man, that everything about him was changed, that it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6582:to him and had not touched him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6584:In this state of mind he had encountered little Gervais, and had robbed
tests/les_miserables.txt:6585:him of his forty sous. Why? He certainly could not have explained it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:6586:was this the last effect and the supreme effort, as it were, of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6587:evil thoughts which he had brought away from the galleys,—a remnant of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6588:impulse, a result of what is called in statics, _acquired force?_ It
tests/les_miserables.txt:6591:who, by habit and instinct, had simply placed his foot upon that money,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6592:while the intelligence was struggling amid so many novel and hitherto
tests/les_miserables.txt:6595:When intelligence reawakened and beheld that action of the brute, Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:6596:Valjean recoiled with anguish and uttered a cry of terror.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6600:It was because,—strange phenomenon, and one which was possible only in
tests/les_miserables.txt:6601:the situation in which he found himself,—in stealing the money from
tests/les_miserables.txt:6602:that child, he had done a thing of which he was no longer capable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6604:However that may be, this last evil action had a decisive effect on
tests/les_miserables.txt:6605:him; it abruptly traversed that chaos which he bore in his mind, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6606:dispersed it, placed on one side the thick obscurity, and on the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:6607:the light, and acted on his soul, in the state in which it then was, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:6608:certain chemical reagents act upon a troubled mixture by precipitating
tests/les_miserables.txt:6609:one element and clarifying the other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6611:First of all, even before examining himself and reflecting, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:6613:child in order to return his money to him; then, when he recognized the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6614:fact that this was impossible, he halted in despair. At the moment when
tests/les_miserables.txt:6615:he exclaimed “I am a wretch!” he had just perceived what he was, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:6616:was already separated from himself to such a degree, that he seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6618:there before him, in flesh and blood, the hideous galley-convict, Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:6619:Valjean, cudgel in hand, his blouse on his hips, his knapsack filled
tests/les_miserables.txt:6620:with stolen objects on his back, with his resolute and gloomy visage,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6621:with his thoughts filled with abominable projects.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6623:Excess of unhappiness had, as we have remarked, made him in some sort a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6624:visionary. This, then, was in the nature of a vision. He actually saw
tests/les_miserables.txt:6625:that Jean Valjean, that sinister face, before him. He had almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:6626:reached the point of asking himself who that man was, and he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6629:His brain was going through one of those violent and yet perfectly calm
tests/les_miserables.txt:6630:moments in which reverie is so profound that it absorbs reality. One no
tests/les_miserables.txt:6631:longer beholds the object which one has before one, and one sees, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:6632:though apart from one’s self, the figures which one has in one’s own
tests/les_miserables.txt:6635:Thus he contemplated himself, so to speak, face to face, and at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6636:same time, athwart this hallucination, he perceived in a mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:6637:depth a sort of light which he at first took for a torch. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:6638:scrutinizing this light which appeared to his conscience with more
tests/les_miserables.txt:6639:attention, he recognized the fact that it possessed a human form and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6640:that this torch was the Bishop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6642:His conscience weighed in turn these two men thus placed before it,—the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6644:soften the second. By one of those singular effects, which are peculiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:6645:to this sort of ecstasies, in proportion as his reverie continued, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:6647:grow less and vanish. After a certain time he was no longer anything
tests/les_miserables.txt:6648:more than a shade. All at once he disappeared. The Bishop alone
tests/les_miserables.txt:6649:remained; he filled the whole soul of this wretched man with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6650:magnificent radiance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6653:with more weakness than a woman, with more fright than a child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6655:As he wept, daylight penetrated more and more clearly into his soul; an
tests/les_miserables.txt:6656:extraordinary light; a light at once ravishing and terrible. His past
tests/les_miserables.txt:6658:his internal hardness, his dismissal to liberty, rejoicing in manifold
tests/les_miserables.txt:6659:plans of vengeance, what had happened to him at the Bishop’s, the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:6660:thing that he had done, that theft of forty sous from a child, a crime
tests/les_miserables.txt:6661:all the more cowardly, and all the more monstrous since it had come
tests/les_miserables.txt:6662:after the Bishop’s pardon,—all this recurred to his mind and appeared
tests/les_miserables.txt:6663:clearly to him, but with a clearness which he had never hitherto
tests/les_miserables.txt:6670:Whither did he go! No one ever knew. The only thing which seems to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:6671:authenticated is that that same night the carrier who served Grenoble
tests/les_miserables.txt:6672:at that epoch, and who arrived at D—— about three o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6673:morning, saw, as he traversed the street in which the Bishop’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:6674:residence was situated, a man in the attitude of prayer, kneeling on
tests/les_miserables.txt:6676:Welcome.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6689:1817 is the year which Louis XVIII., with a certain royal assurance
tests/les_miserables.txt:6690:which was not wanting in pride, entitled the twenty-second of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:6691:reign. It is the year in which M. Bruguière de Sorsum was celebrated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6693:royal bird, were besmeared with azure and decked with fleurs-de-lys. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:6694:was the candid time at which Count Lynch sat every Sunday as
tests/les_miserables.txt:6695:church-warden in the church-warden’s pew of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:6696:his costume of a peer of France, with his red ribbon and his long nose
tests/les_miserables.txt:6697:and the majesty of profile peculiar to a man who has performed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6698:brilliant action. The brilliant action performed by M. Lynch was this:
tests/les_miserables.txt:6699:being mayor of Bordeaux, on the 12th of March, 1814, he had surrendered
tests/les_miserables.txt:6700:the city a little too promptly to M. the Duke d’Angoulême. Hence his
tests/les_miserables.txt:6702:years of age in vast caps of morocco leather with ear-tabs resembling
tests/les_miserables.txt:6703:Esquimaux mitres. The French army was dressed in white, after the mode
tests/les_miserables.txt:6704:of the Austrian; the regiments were called legions; instead of numbers
tests/les_miserables.txt:6706:since England refused him green cloth, he was having his old coats
tests/les_miserables.txt:6707:turned. In 1817 Pelligrini sang; Mademoiselle Bigottini danced; Potier
tests/les_miserables.txt:6708:reigned; Odry did not yet exist. Madame Saqui had succeeded to Forioso.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6709:There were still Prussians in France. M. Delalot was a personage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6710:Legitimacy had just asserted itself by cutting off the hand, then the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6711:head, of Pleignier, of Carbonneau, and of Tolleron. The Prince de
tests/les_miserables.txt:6712:Talleyrand, grand chamberlain, and the Abbé Louis, appointed minister
tests/les_miserables.txt:6713:of finance, laughed as they looked at each other, with the laugh of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6714:two augurs; both of them had celebrated, on the 14th of July, 1790, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6716:bishop, Louis had served it in the capacity of deacon. In 1817, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6717:side-alleys of this same Champ de Mars, two great cylinders of wood
tests/les_miserables.txt:6719:blue, with traces of eagles and bees, from which the gilding was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6720:falling. These were the columns which two years before had upheld the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6721:Emperor’s platform in the Champ de Mai. They were blackened here and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6722:there with the scorches of the bivouac of Austrians encamped near
tests/les_miserables.txt:6723:Gros-Caillou. Two or three of these columns had disappeared in these
tests/les_miserables.txt:6724:bivouac fires, and had warmed the large hands of the Imperial troops.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6726:the month of June and in the Field of March (Mars). In this year, 1817,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6728:Charter_. The most recent Parisian sensation was the crime of Dautun,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6732:They had begun to feel anxious at the Naval Department, on account of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6733:the lack of news from that fatal frigate, _The Medusa_, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6734:destined to cover Chaumareix with infamy and Géricault with glory.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6735:Colonel Selves was going to Egypt to become Soliman-Pasha. The palace
tests/les_miserables.txt:6736:of Thermes, in the Rue de La Harpe, served as a shop for a cooper. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:6737:the platform of the octagonal tower of the Hotel de Cluny, the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:6738:shed of boards, which had served as an observatory to Messier, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6739:naval astronomer under Louis XVI., was still to be seen. The Duchesse
tests/les_miserables.txt:6741:boudoir furnished by X. in sky-blue satin. The N’s were scratched off
tests/les_miserables.txt:6742:the Louvre. The bridge of Austerlitz had abdicated, and was entitled
tests/les_miserables.txt:6744:which disguised the bridge of Austerlitz and the Jardin des Plantes at
tests/les_miserables.txt:6745:one stroke. Louis XVIII., much preoccupied while annotating Horace with
tests/les_miserables.txt:6746:the corner of his finger-nail, heroes who have become emperors, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6747:makers of wooden shoes who have become dauphins, had two
tests/les_miserables.txt:6748:anxieties,—Napoleon and Mathurin Bruneau. The French Academy had given
tests/les_miserables.txt:6749:for its prize subject, _The Happiness procured through Study_. M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6750:Bellart was officially eloquent. In his shadow could be seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:6751:germinating that future advocate-general of Broë, dedicated to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6752:sarcasms of Paul-Louis Courier. There was a false Chateaubriand, named
tests/les_miserables.txt:6753:Marchangy, in the interim, until there should be a false Marchangy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6754:named d’Arlincourt. _Claire d’Albe_ and _Malek-Adel_ were masterpieces;
tests/les_miserables.txt:6755:Madame Cottin was proclaimed the chief writer of the epoch. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:6756:Institute had the academician, Napoleon Bonaparte, stricken from its
tests/les_miserables.txt:6757:list of members. A royal ordinance erected Angoulême into a naval
tests/les_miserables.txt:6758:school; for the Duc d’Angoulême, being lord high admiral, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6759:evident that the city of Angoulême had all the qualities of a seaport;
tests/les_miserables.txt:6760:otherwise the monarchical principle would have received a wound. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6761:Council of Ministers the question was agitated whether vignettes
tests/les_miserables.txt:6762:representing slack-rope performances, which adorned Franconi’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:6763:advertising posters, and which attracted throngs of street urchins,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6765:fellow, with a square face and a wart on his cheek, directed the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:6766:private concerts of the Marquise de Sasenaye in the Rue Ville l’Évêque.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6770:Valois, which upheld the Bourbons. The Duc de Berri, already surveyed
tests/les_miserables.txt:6771:from the shadow by Louvel, had just been married to a princess of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6772:Sicily. Madame de Staël had died a year previously. The body-guard
tests/les_miserables.txt:6774:Their form was restricted, but their liberty was great. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:6775:_Constitutionnel_ was constitutional. _La Minerve_ called Chateaubriand
tests/les_miserables.txt:6776:_Chateaubriant_. That _t_ made the good middle-class people laugh
tests/les_miserables.txt:6777:heartily at the expense of the great writer. In journals which sold
tests/les_miserables.txt:6781:no longer any genius. No one is ignorant of the fact that letters sent
tests/les_miserables.txt:6782:to an exile by post very rarely reached him, as the police made it
tests/les_miserables.txt:6783:their religious duty to intercept them. This is no new fact; Descartes
tests/les_miserables.txt:6784:complained of it in his exile. Now David, having, in a Belgian
tests/les_miserables.txt:6785:publication, shown some displeasure at not receiving letters which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:6786:been written to him, it struck the royalist journals as amusing; and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6787:they derided the prescribed man well on this occasion. What separated
tests/les_miserables.txt:6788:two men more than an abyss was to say, the _regicides_, or to say the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6791:that the era of revolution had been closed forever by King Louis
tests/les_miserables.txt:6793:of the Pont-Neuf, the word _Redivivus_ was carved on the pedestal that
tests/les_miserables.txt:6795:making the rough draft of his privy assembly to consolidate the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6796:monarchy. The leaders of the Right said at grave conjunctures, “We must
tests/les_miserables.txt:6797:write to Bacot.” MM. Canuel, O’Mahoney, and De Chappedelaine were
tests/les_miserables.txt:6798:preparing the sketch, to some extent with Monsieur’s approval, of what
tests/les_miserables.txt:6799:was to become later on “The Conspiracy of the Bord de l’Eau”—of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6801:Delaverderie was conferring with Trogoff. M. Decazes, who was liberal
tests/les_miserables.txt:6803:at No. 27 Rue Saint-Dominique, clad in footed trousers, and slippers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6804:with a madras kerchief knotted over his gray hair, with his eyes fixed
tests/les_miserables.txt:6805:on a mirror, a complete set of dentist’s instruments spread out before
tests/les_miserables.txt:6806:him, cleaning his teeth, which were charming, while he dictated _The
tests/les_miserables.txt:6807:Monarchy according to the Charter_ to M. Pilorge, his secretary.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6808:Criticism, assuming an authoritative tone, preferred Lafon to Talma. M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6810:Nodier wrote _Thérèse Aubert_. Divorce was abolished. Lyceums called
tests/les_miserables.txt:6811:themselves colleges. The collegians, decorated on the collar with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6812:golden fleur-de-lys, fought each other _apropos_ of the King of Rome.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6813:The counter-police of the château had denounced to her Royal Highness
tests/les_miserables.txt:6814:Madame, the portrait, everywhere exhibited, of M. the Duc d’Orléans,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6815:who made a better appearance in his uniform of a colonel-general of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6816:hussars than M. the Duc de Berri, in his uniform of colonel-general of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6817:dragoons—a serious inconvenience. The city of Paris was having the dome
tests/les_miserables.txt:6819:themselves what M. de Trinquelague would do on such or such an
tests/les_miserables.txt:6820:occasion; M. Clausel de Montals differed on divers points from M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6821:Clausel de Coussergues; M. de Salaberry was not satisfied. The comedian
tests/les_miserables.txt:6822:Picard, who belonged to the Academy, which the comedian Molière had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:6826:Montarlot. Fabvier was factious; Bavoux was revolutionary. The Liberal,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6827:Pélicier, published an edition of Voltaire, with the following title:
tests/les_miserables.txt:6828:_Works of Voltaire_, of the French Academy. “That will attract
tests/les_miserables.txt:6829:purchasers,” said the ingenious editor. The general opinion was that M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6830:Charles Loyson would be the genius of the century; envy was beginning
tests/les_miserables.txt:6831:to gnaw at him—a sign of glory; and this verse was composed on him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:6836:As Cardinal Fesch refused to resign, M. de Pins, Archbishop of Amasie,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6837:administered the diocese of Lyons. The quarrel over the valley of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6838:Dappes was begun between Switzerland and France by a memoir from
tests/les_miserables.txt:6839:Captain, afterwards General Dufour. Saint-Simon, ignored, was erecting
tests/les_miserables.txt:6840:his sublime dream. There was a celebrated Fourier at the Academy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6841:Science, whom posterity has forgotten; and in some garret an obscure
tests/les_miserables.txt:6842:Fourier, whom the future will recall. Lord Byron was beginning to make
tests/les_miserables.txt:6843:his mark; a note to a poem by Millevoye introduced him to France in
tests/les_miserables.txt:6844:these terms: _a certain Lord Baron_. David d’Angers was trying to work
tests/les_miserables.txt:6847:of an unknown priest, named Félicité-Robert, who, at a latter date,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6848:became Lamennais. A thing which smoked and clattered on the Seine with
tests/les_miserables.txt:6849:the noise of a swimming dog went and came beneath the windows of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6850:Tuileries, from the Pont Royal to the Pont Louis XV.; it was a piece of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6851:mechanism which was not good for much; a sort of plaything, the idle
tests/les_miserables.txt:6853:stared indifferently at this useless thing. M. de Vaublanc, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6854:reformer of the Institute by a coup d’état, the distinguished author of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6855:numerous academicians, ordinances, and batches of members, after having
tests/les_miserables.txt:6856:created them, could not succeed in becoming one himself. The Faubourg
tests/les_miserables.txt:6858:prefect of police, on account of his piety. Dupuytren and Récamier
tests/les_miserables.txt:6859:entered into a quarrel in the amphitheatre of the School of Medicine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6860:and threatened each other with their fists on the subject of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6862:on nature, tried to please bigoted reaction by reconciling fossils with
tests/les_miserables.txt:6865:M. François de Neufchâteau, the praiseworthy cultivator of the memory
tests/les_miserables.txt:6867:[potato] pronounced _parmentière_, and succeeded therein not at all.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6868:The Abbé Grégoire, ex-bishop, ex-conventionary, ex-senator, had passed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6869:in the royalist polemics, to the state of “Infamous Grégoire.” The
tests/les_miserables.txt:6870:locution of which we have made use—_passed to the state of_—has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:6871:condemned as a neologism by M. Royer Collard. Under the third arch of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6872:the Pont de Jéna, the new stone with which, the two years previously,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6873:the mining aperture made by Blücher to blow up the bridge had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:6874:stopped up, was still recognizable on account of its whiteness. Justice
tests/les_miserables.txt:6878:utterance. Six months in prison. Traitors showed themselves unbuttoned;
tests/les_miserables.txt:6879:men who had gone over to the enemy on the eve of battle made no secret
tests/les_miserables.txt:6880:of their recompense, and strutted immodestly in the light of day, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:6881:the cynicism of riches and dignities; deserters from Ligny and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6883:their devotion to the monarchy in the most barefaced manner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6885:This is what floats up confusedly, pell-mell, for the year 1817, and is
tests/les_miserables.txt:6886:now forgotten. History neglects nearly all these particulars, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6887:cannot do otherwise; the infinity would overwhelm it. Nevertheless,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6888:these details, which are wrongly called trivial,—there are no trivial
tests/les_miserables.txt:6889:facts in humanity, nor little leaves in vegetation,—are useful. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:6890:of the physiognomy of the years that the physiognomy of the centuries
tests/les_miserables.txt:6891:is composed. In this year of 1817 four young Parisians arranged “a fine
tests/les_miserables.txt:6892:farce.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6901:These Parisians came, one from Toulouse, another from Limoges, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6906:These young men were insignificant; every one has seen such faces; four
tests/les_miserables.txt:6907:specimens of humanity taken at random; neither good nor bad, neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:6909:charming April which is called twenty years. They were four Oscars;
tests/les_miserables.txt:6910:for, at that epoch, Arthurs did not yet exist. _Burn for him the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6911:perfumes of Araby!_ exclaimed romance. _Oscar advances. Oscar, I shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:6912:behold him!_ People had just emerged from Ossian; elegance was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6913:Scandinavian and Caledonian; the pure English style was only to prevail
tests/les_miserables.txt:6917:These Oscars bore the names, one of Félix Tholomyès, of Toulouse; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6918:second, Listolier, of Cahors; the next, Fameuil, of Limoges; the last,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6919:Blachevelle, of Montauban. Naturally, each of them had his mistress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6920:Blachevelle loved Favourite, so named because she had been in England;
tests/les_miserables.txt:6921:Listolier adored Dahlia, who had taken for her nickname the name of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6923:had Fantine, called the Blonde, because of her beautiful, sunny hair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6927:yet entirely divorced from their needles; somewhat disturbed by
tests/les_miserables.txt:6928:intrigues, but still retaining on their faces something of the serenity
tests/les_miserables.txt:6929:of toil, and in their souls that flower of honesty which survives the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6930:first fall in woman. One of the four was called the young, because she
tests/les_miserables.txt:6931:was the youngest of them, and one was called the old; the old one was
tests/les_miserables.txt:6932:twenty-three. Not to conceal anything, the three first were more
tests/les_miserables.txt:6933:experienced, more heedless, and more emancipated into the tumult of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6936:Dahlia, Zéphine, and especially Favourite, could not have said as much.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6937:There had already been more than one episode in their romance, though
tests/les_miserables.txt:6939:first chapter had turned out to be Alphonse in the second, and Gustave
tests/les_miserables.txt:6940:in the third. Poverty and coquetry are two fatal counsellors; one
tests/les_miserables.txt:6941:scolds and the other flatters, and the beautiful daughters of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6942:people have both of them whispering in their ear, each on its own side.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6943:These badly guarded souls listen. Hence the falls which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:6944:accomplish, and the stones which are thrown at them. They are
tests/les_miserables.txt:6945:overwhelmed with splendor of all that is immaculate and inaccessible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6950:was an old unmarried professor of mathematics, a brutal man and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6952:professor, when he was a young man, had one day seen a chambermaid’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:6953:gown catch on a fender; he had fallen in love in consequence of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:6954:accident. The result had been Favourite. She met her father from time
tests/les_miserables.txt:6958:opened the sideboard, and ate and drank, had a mattress which she owned
tests/les_miserables.txt:6959:brought in, and installed herself. This cross and pious old mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:6962:quarters for company, where she spoke ill of her daughter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6964:It was having rosy nails that were too pretty which had drawn Dahlia to
tests/les_miserables.txt:6965:Listolier, to others perhaps, to idleness. How could she make such
tests/les_miserables.txt:6967:hands. As for Zéphine, she had conquered Fameuil by her roguish and
tests/les_miserables.txt:6968:caressing little way of saying “Yes, sir.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:6971:The young men were comrades; the young girls were friends. Such loves
tests/les_miserables.txt:6972:are always accompanied by such friendships.
tests/les_miserables.txt:6974:Goodness and philosophy are two distinct things; the proof of this is
tests/les_miserables.txt:6975:that, after making all due allowances for these little irregular
tests/les_miserables.txt:6976:households, Favourite, Zéphine, and Dahlia were philosophical young
tests/les_miserables.txt:6979:Good! some one will exclaim; and Tholomyès? Solomon would reply that
tests/les_miserables.txt:6980:love forms a part of wisdom. We will confine ourselves to saying that
tests/les_miserables.txt:6983:She alone, of all the four, was not called “thou” by a single one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:6988:depths of social shadow, she bore on her brow the sign of the anonymous
tests/les_miserables.txt:6989:and the unknown. She was born at M. sur M. Of what parents? Who can
tests/les_miserables.txt:6990:say? She had never known father or mother. She was called Fantine. Why
tests/les_miserables.txt:6991:Fantine? She had never borne any other name. At the epoch of her birth
tests/les_miserables.txt:6992:the Directory still existed. She had no family name; she had no family;
tests/les_miserables.txt:6993:no baptismal name; the Church no longer existed. She bore the name
tests/les_miserables.txt:6994:which pleased the first random passer-by, who had encountered her, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:6995:a very small child, running bare-legged in the street. She received the
tests/les_miserables.txt:6996:name as she received the water from the clouds upon her brow when it
tests/les_miserables.txt:6997:rained. She was called little Fantine. No one knew more than that. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:6998:human creature had entered life in just this way. At the age of ten,
tests/les_miserables.txt:6999:Fantine quitted the town and went to service with some farmers in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7000:neighborhood. At fifteen she came to Paris “to seek her fortune.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7001:Fantine was beautiful, and remained pure as long as she could. She was
tests/les_miserables.txt:7014:such a way as constantly to encounter him again. There is a way of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7015:avoiding which resembles seeking. In short, the eclogue took place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7017:Blachevelle, Listolier, and Fameuil formed a sort of group of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:7020:Tholomyès was the antique old student; he was rich; he had an income of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7021:four thousand francs; four thousand francs! a splendid scandal on Mount
tests/les_miserables.txt:7024:bald spot, of which he himself said with sadness, _the skull at thirty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7025:the knee at forty_. His digestion was mediocre, and he had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:7026:attacked by a watering in one eye. But in proportion as his youth
tests/les_miserables.txt:7027:disappeared, gayety was kindled; he replaced his teeth with
tests/les_miserables.txt:7029:eye laughed incessantly. He was dilapidated but still in flower. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:7030:youth, which was packing up for departure long before its time, beat a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7032:but fire. He had had a piece rejected at the Vaudeville. He made a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:7034:last degree, which is a vast force in the eyes of the weak. Being thus
tests/les_miserables.txt:7035:ironical and bald, he was the leader. _Iron_ is an English word. Is it
tests/les_miserables.txt:7039:oracle, and said to them:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7044:particular, just as the old women in Naples cry to Saint Januarius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7045:‘_Faccia gialluta, fa o miracolo_, Yellow face, perform thy miracle,’
tests/les_miserables.txt:7046:so our beauties say to me incessantly, ‘Tholomyès, when will you bring
tests/les_miserables.txt:7049:discuss the question.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7052:Thereupon, Tholomyès lowered his voice and articulated something so
tests/les_miserables.txt:7053:mirthful, that a vast and enthusiastic grin broke out upon the four
tests/les_miserables.txt:7054:mouths simultaneously, and Blachevelle exclaimed, “That is an idea.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7058:their confidential colloquy was lost in shadow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7060:The result of these shades was a dazzling pleasure party which took
tests/les_miserables.txt:7061:place on the following Sunday, the four young men inviting the four
tests/les_miserables.txt:7070:It is hard nowadays to picture to one’s self what a pleasure-trip of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7071:students and grisettes to the country was like, forty-five years ago.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7073:may be called circumparisian life has changed completely in the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:7074:half-century; where there was the cuckoo, there is the railway car;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7076:of Fécamp nowadays as they spoke of Saint-Cloud in those days. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:7077:Paris of 1862 is a city which has France for its outskirts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7079:The four couples conscientiously went through with all the country
tests/les_miserables.txt:7080:follies possible at that time. The vacation was beginning, and it was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7081:warm, bright, summer day. On the preceding day, Favourite, the only one
tests/les_miserables.txt:7084:why they rose at five o’clock in the morning. Then they went to
tests/les_miserables.txt:7085:Saint-Cloud by the coach, looked at the dry cascade and exclaimed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7088:themselves to a game of ring-throwing under the quincunx of trees of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7089:the grand fountain; they ascended Diogenes’ lantern, they gambled for
tests/les_miserables.txt:7090:macaroons at the roulette establishment of the Pont de Sèvres, picked
tests/les_miserables.txt:7092:everywhere, and were perfectly happy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7094:The young girls rustled and chatted like warblers escaped from their
tests/les_miserables.txt:7095:cage. It was a perfect delirium. From time to time they bestowed little
tests/les_miserables.txt:7096:taps on the young men. Matutinal intoxication of life! adorable years!
tests/les_miserables.txt:7099:branches, on account of the charming head which is coming on behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:7101:beloved woman holding your hand, and crying, “Ah, my new boots! what a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7105:Let us say at once that that merry obstacle, a shower, was lacking in
tests/les_miserables.txt:7106:the case of this good-humored party, although Favourite had said as
tests/les_miserables.txt:7108:crawling in the paths,—a sign of rain, children.”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:7110:All four were madly pretty. A good old classic poet, then famous, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7112:strolled that day beneath the chestnut-trees of Saint-Cloud, saw them
tests/les_miserables.txt:7113:pass about ten o’clock in the morning, and exclaimed, “There is one too
tests/les_miserables.txt:7114:many of them,” as he thought of the Graces. Favourite, Blachevelle’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:7116:under the great green boughs, jumped the ditches, stalked distractedly
tests/les_miserables.txt:7118:young female faun. Zéphine and Dahlia, whom chance had made beautiful
tests/les_miserables.txt:7119:in such a way that they set each off when they were together, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:7120:completed each other, never left each other, more from an instinct of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7121:coquetry than from friendship, and clinging to each other, they assumed
tests/les_miserables.txt:7122:English poses; the first _keepsakes_ had just made their appearance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7123:melancholy was dawning for women, as later on, Byronism dawned for men;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7126:engaged in discussing their professors, explained to Fantine the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7127:difference that existed between M. Delvincourt and M. Blondeau.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7129:Blachevelle seemed to have been created expressly to carry Favourite’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:7130:single-bordered, imitation India shawl of Ternaux’s manufacture, on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:7134:the force of government in him; there was dictation in his joviality;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7135:his principal ornament was a pair of trousers of elephant-leg pattern
tests/les_miserables.txt:7136:of nankeen, with straps of braided copper wire; he carried a stout
tests/les_miserables.txt:7137:rattan worth two hundred francs in his hand, and, as he treated himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:7138:to everything, a strange thing called a cigar in his mouth. Nothing was
tests/les_miserables.txt:7139:sacred to him; he smoked.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7146:evidently received an office from God,—laughter. She preferred to carry
tests/les_miserables.txt:7148:rather than on her head. Her thick blond hair, which was inclined to
tests/les_miserables.txt:7149:wave, and which easily uncoiled, and which it was necessary to fasten
tests/les_miserables.txt:7150:up incessantly, seemed made for the flight of Galatea under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7151:willows. Her rosy lips babbled enchantingly. The corners of her mouth
tests/les_miserables.txt:7153:of encouraging the audacious; but her long, shadowy lashes drooped
tests/les_miserables.txt:7154:discreetly over the jollity of the lower part of the face as though to
tests/les_miserables.txt:7155:call a halt. There was something indescribably harmonious and striking
tests/les_miserables.txt:7157:brown buskins, whose ribbons traced an X on her fine, white,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7158:open-worked stockings, and that sort of muslin spencer, a Marseilles
tests/les_miserables.txt:7159:invention, whose name, _canezou_, a corruption of the words _quinze
tests/les_miserables.txt:7160:août_, pronounced after the fashion of the Canebière, signifies fine
tests/les_miserables.txt:7162:already said, wore low-necked dresses without disguise, which in
tests/les_miserables.txt:7163:summer, beneath flower-adorned hats, are very graceful and enticing;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7164:but by the side of these audacious outfits, blond Fantine’s _canezou_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7165:with its transparencies, its indiscretion, and its reticence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7166:concealing and displaying at one and the same time, seemed an alluring
tests/les_miserables.txt:7167:godsend of decency, and the famous Court of Love, presided over by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7168:Vicomtesse de Cette, with the sea-green eyes, would, perhaps, have
tests/les_miserables.txt:7169:awarded the prize for coquetry to this _canezou_, in the contest for
tests/les_miserables.txt:7173:Brilliant of face, delicate of profile, with eyes of a deep blue, heavy
tests/les_miserables.txt:7174:lids, feet arched and small, wrists and ankles admirably formed, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7175:white skin which, here and there allowed the azure branching of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7176:veins to be seen, joy, a cheek that was young and fresh, the robust
tests/les_miserables.txt:7177:throat of the Juno of Ægina, a strong and supple nape of the neck,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7179:the middle, visible through the muslin; a gayety cooled by dreaminess;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7180:sculptural and exquisite—such was Fantine; and beneath these feminine
tests/les_miserables.txt:7181:adornments and these ribbons one could divine a statue, and in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:7184:Fantine was beautiful, without being too conscious of it. Those rare
tests/les_miserables.txt:7185:dreamers, mysterious priests of the beautiful who silently confront
tests/les_miserables.txt:7186:everything with perfection, would have caught a glimpse in this little
tests/les_miserables.txt:7187:working-woman, through the transparency of her Parisian grace, of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7188:ancient sacred euphony. This daughter of the shadows was thoroughbred.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7194:To an observer who studied her attentively, that which breathed from
tests/les_miserables.txt:7195:her athwart all the intoxication of her age, the season, and her love
tests/les_miserables.txt:7196:affair, was an invincible expression of reserve and modesty. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:7197:remained a little astonished. This chaste astonishment is the shade of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7198:difference which separates Psyche from Venus. Fantine had the long,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7200:sacred fire with a golden pin. Although she would have refused nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:7202:face in repose was supremely virginal; a sort of serious and almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:7203:austere dignity suddenly overwhelmed her at certain times, and there
tests/les_miserables.txt:7204:was nothing more singular and disturbing than to see gayety become so
tests/les_miserables.txt:7205:suddenly extinct there, and meditation succeed to cheerfulness without
tests/les_miserables.txt:7206:any transition state. This sudden and sometimes severely accentuated
tests/les_miserables.txt:7208:chin, presented that equilibrium of outline which is quite distinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:7209:from equilibrium of proportion, and from which harmony of countenance
tests/les_miserables.txt:7210:results; in the very characteristic interval which separates the base
tests/les_miserables.txt:7211:of the nose from the upper lip, she had that imperceptible and charming
tests/les_miserables.txt:7212:fold, a mysterious sign of chastity, which makes Barberousse fall in
tests/les_miserables.txt:7213:love with a Diana found in the treasures of Iconia.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7215:Love is a fault; so be it. Fantine was innocence floating high over
tests/les_miserables.txt:7224:That day was composed of dawn, from one end to the other. All nature
tests/les_miserables.txt:7227:leaves vaguely; the branches gesticulated in the wind, bees pillaged
tests/les_miserables.txt:7229:yarrow, the clover, and the sterile oats; in the august park of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7230:King of France there was a pack of vagabonds, the birds.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7232:The four merry couples, mingled with the sun, the fields, the flowers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7235:And in this community of Paradise, talking, singing, running, dancing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7236:chasing butterflies, plucking convolvulus, wetting their pink,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7237:open-work stockings in the tall grass, fresh, wild, without malice, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:7238:received, to some extent, the kisses of all, with the exception of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7239:Fantine, who was hedged about with that vague resistance of hers
tests/les_miserables.txt:7240:composed of dreaminess and wildness, and who was in love. “You always
tests/les_miserables.txt:7243:Such things are joys. These passages of happy couples are a profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:7244:appeal to life and nature, and make a caress and light spring forth
tests/les_miserables.txt:7245:from everything. There was once a fairy who created the fields and
tests/les_miserables.txt:7246:forests expressly for those in love,—in that eternal hedge-school of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7247:lovers, which is forever beginning anew, and which will last as long as
tests/les_miserables.txt:7248:there are hedges and scholars. Hence the popularity of spring among
tests/les_miserables.txt:7249:thinkers. The patrician and the knife-grinder, the duke and the peer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7250:the limb of the law, the courtiers and townspeople, as they used to say
tests/les_miserables.txt:7251:in olden times, all are subjects of this fairy. They laugh and hunt,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7252:and there is in the air the brilliance of an apotheosis—what a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7253:transfiguration effected by love! Notaries’ clerks are gods. And the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7254:little cries, the pursuits through the grass, the waists embraced on
tests/les_miserables.txt:7255:the fly, those jargons which are melodies, those adorations which burst
tests/les_miserables.txt:7256:forth in the manner of pronouncing a syllable, those cherries torn from
tests/les_miserables.txt:7257:one mouth by another,—all this blazes forth and takes its place among
tests/les_miserables.txt:7258:the celestial glories. Beautiful women waste themselves sweetly. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:7259:think that this will never come to an end. Philosophers, poets,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7260:painters, observe these ecstasies and know not what to make of it, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:7261:greatly are they dazzled by it. The departure for Cythera! exclaims
tests/les_miserables.txt:7262:Watteau; Lancret, the painter of plebeians, contemplates his bourgeois,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7263:who have flitted away into the azure sky; Diderot stretches out his
tests/les_miserables.txt:7266:After breakfast the four couples went to what was then called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7268:escapes our memory at this moment, and which, at that epoch, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:7269:attracting all Paris to Saint-Cloud. It was an odd and charming shrub
tests/les_miserables.txt:7270:with a long stem, whose numerous branches, bristling and leafless and
tests/les_miserables.txt:7271:as fine as threads, were covered with a million tiny white rosettes;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7273:There was always an admiring crowd about it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7275:After viewing the shrub, Tholomyès exclaimed, “I offer you asses!” and
tests/les_miserables.txt:7276:having agreed upon a price with the owner of the asses, they returned
tests/les_miserables.txt:7277:by way of Vanvres and Issy. At Issy an incident occurred. The truly
tests/les_miserables.txt:7278:national park, at that time owned by Bourguin the contractor, happened
tests/les_miserables.txt:7279:to be wide open. They passed the gates, visited the manikin anchorite
tests/les_miserables.txt:7280:in his grotto, tried the mysterious little effects of the famous
tests/les_miserables.txt:7281:cabinet of mirrors, the wanton trap worthy of a satyr become a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7282:millionaire or of Turcaret metamorphosed into a Priapus. They had
tests/les_miserables.txt:7283:stoutly shaken the swing attached to the two chestnut-trees celebrated
tests/les_miserables.txt:7285:producing folds in the fluttering skirts which Greuze would have found
tests/les_miserables.txt:7287:somewhat of a Spaniard, Toulouse being the cousin of Tolosa, sang, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7288:melancholy chant, the old ballad _gallega_, probably inspired by some
tests/les_miserables.txt:7301:All my soul doth come;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7302:For instruction meet
tests/les_miserables.txt:7303:I receive at thy feet”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7309:Favourite, with a good deal of acrimony.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7311:After leaving the asses there was a fresh delight; they crossed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7312:Seine in a boat, and proceeding from Passy on foot they reached the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7313:barrier of l’Étoile. They had been up since five o’clock that morning,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7314:as the reader will remember; but _bah! there is no such thing as
tests/les_miserables.txt:7317:About three o’clock the four couples, frightened at their happiness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7318:were sliding down the Russian mountains, a singular edifice which then
tests/les_miserables.txt:7319:occupied the heights of Beaujon, and whose undulating line was visible
tests/les_miserables.txt:7322:From time to time Favourite exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7324:“And the surprise? I claim the surprise.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7327:“Patience,” replied Tholomyès.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7336:dinner; and the radiant party of eight, somewhat weary at last, became
tests/les_miserables.txt:7337:stranded in Bombarda’s public house, a branch establishment which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:7339:Bombarda, whose sign could then be seen in the Rue de Rivoli, near
tests/les_miserables.txt:7342:A large but ugly room, with an alcove and a bed at the end (they had
tests/les_miserables.txt:7343:been obliged to put up with this accommodation in view of the Sunday
tests/les_miserables.txt:7344:crowd); two windows whence they could survey beyond the elms, the quay
tests/les_miserables.txt:7345:and the river; a magnificent August sunlight lightly touching the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7347:mingled with the hats of men and women; at the other the four couples
tests/les_miserables.txt:7348:seated round a merry confusion of platters, dishes, glasses, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:7353:A noise, a clatter of the feet that was abominable,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7358:This was the state which the shepherd idyl, begun at five o’clock in
tests/les_miserables.txt:7359:the morning, had reached at half-past four in the afternoon. The sun
tests/les_miserables.txt:7363:but light and dust, the two things of which glory is composed. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:7364:horses of Marly, those neighing marbles, were prancing in a cloud of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7365:gold. Carriages were going and coming. A squadron of magnificent
tests/les_miserables.txt:7366:body-guards, with their clarions at their head, were descending the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7368:sun, floated over the dome of the Tuileries. The Place de la Concorde,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7369:which had become the Place Louis XV. once more, was choked with happy
tests/les_miserables.txt:7371:white-watered ribbon, which had not yet wholly disappeared from
tests/les_miserables.txt:7372:button-holes in the year 1817. Here and there choruses of little girls
tests/les_miserables.txt:7373:threw to the winds, amid the passers-by, who formed into circles and
tests/les_miserables.txt:7374:applauded, the then celebrated Bourbon air, which was destined to
tests/les_miserables.txt:7375:strike the Hundred Days with lightning, and which had for its refrain:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7380:“Give us back our father from Ghent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7381:Give us back our father.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7385:decorated with the fleur-de-lys, like the bourgeois, scattered over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7388:journeyman printers had on paper caps; their laughter was audible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7389:Everything was radiant. It was a time of undisputed peace and profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:7390:royalist security; it was the epoch when a special and private report
tests/les_miserables.txt:7391:of Chief of Police Anglès to the King, on the subject of the suburbs of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7394:“Taking all things into consideration, Sire, there is nothing to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:7395:feared from these people. They are as heedless and as indolent as cats.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7396:The populace is restless in the provinces; it is not in Paris. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:7399:populace of Paris the capital. It is remarkable that the stature of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7401:populace of the suburbs is still more puny than at the time of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7405:Prefects of the police do not deem it possible that a cat can transform
tests/les_miserables.txt:7407:miracle wrought by the populace of Paris. Moreover, the cat so despised
tests/les_miserables.txt:7408:by Count Anglès possessed the esteem of the republics of old. In their
tests/les_miserables.txt:7409:eyes it was liberty incarnate; and as though to serve as pendant to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7410:Minerva Aptera of the Piræus, there stood on the public square in
tests/les_miserables.txt:7411:Corinth the colossal bronze figure of a cat. The ingenuous police of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7412:the Restoration beheld the populace of Paris in too “rose-colored” a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7413:light; it is not so much of “an amiable rabble” as it is thought. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:7414:Parisian is to the Frenchman what the Athenian was to the Greek: no one
tests/les_miserables.txt:7416:than he, no one can better assume the air of forgetfulness; let him not
tests/les_miserables.txt:7417:be trusted nevertheless; he is ready for any sort of cool deed; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:7419:every sort of fury. Give him a pike, he will produce the 10th of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7421:and Danton’s resource. Is it a question of country, he enlists; is it a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7423:with wrath, is epic; his blouse drapes itself like the folds of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7424:chlamys. Take care! he will make of the first Rue Grenétat which comes
tests/les_miserables.txt:7427:terrible, and his breath will become a tempest, and there will issue
tests/les_miserables.txt:7428:forth from that slender chest enough wind to disarrange the folds of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7430:Revolution, mixed with arms, conquers Europe. He sings; it is his
tests/les_miserables.txt:7437:to our four couples. The dinner, as we have said, was drawing to its
tests/les_miserables.txt:7438:close.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7446:Chat at table, the chat of love; it is as impossible to reproduce one
tests/les_miserables.txt:7447:as the other; the chat of love is a cloud; the chat at table is smoke.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7450:laughing, Fantine smiling, Listolier blowing a wooden trumpet which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:7451:had purchased at Saint-Cloud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7453:Favourite gazed tenderly at Blachevelle and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7455:“Blachevelle, I adore you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7458:This called forth a question from Blachevelle:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7460:“What would you do, Favourite, if I were to cease to love you?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7463:“I!” cried Favourite. “Ah! Do not say that even in jest! If you were to
tests/les_miserables.txt:7464:cease to love me, I would spring after you, I would scratch you, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:7469:Blachevelle smiled with the voluptuous self-conceit of a man who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:7470:tickled in his self-love. Favourite resumed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7472:“Yes, I would scream to the police! Ah! I should not restrain myself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7476:Blachevelle threw himself back in his chair, in an ecstasy, and closed
tests/les_miserables.txt:7479:Dahlia, as she ate, said in a low voice to Favourite, amid the uproar:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7481:“So you really idolize him deeply, that Blachevelle of yours?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7485:again. “He is avaricious. I love the little fellow opposite me in my
tests/les_miserables.txt:7486:house. He is very nice, that young man; do you know him? One can see
tests/les_miserables.txt:7487:that he is an actor by profession. I love actors. As soon as he comes
tests/les_miserables.txt:7488:in, his mother says to him: ‘Ah! mon Dieu! my peace of mind is gone.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7490:head!’ So he goes up to rat-ridden garrets, to black holes, as high as
tests/les_miserables.txt:7491:he can mount, and there he sets to singing, declaiming, how do I know
tests/les_miserables.txt:7492:what? so that he can be heard downstairs! He earns twenty sous a day at
tests/les_miserables.txt:7493:an attorney’s by penning quibbles. He is the son of a former precentor
tests/les_miserables.txt:7494:of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas. Ah! he is very nice. He idolizes me so,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7495:that one day when he saw me making batter for some pancakes, he said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:7497:It is only artists who can say such things as that. Ah! he is very
tests/les_miserables.txt:7498:nice. I am in a fair way to go out of my head over that little fellow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7499:Never mind; I tell Blachevelle that I adore him—how I lie! Hey! How I
tests/les_miserables.txt:7506:the wind irritates me; the wind does not abate. Blachevelle is very
tests/les_miserables.txt:7520:all at once; it was no longer anything but noise. Tholomyès intervened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7522:“Let us not talk at random nor too fast,” he exclaimed. “Let us
tests/les_miserables.txt:7523:reflect, if we wish to be brilliant. Too much improvisation empties the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7528:frozen. Excess of zeal ruins peach-trees and apricot-trees. Excess of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7529:zeal kills the grace and the mirth of good dinners. No zeal, gentlemen!
tests/les_miserables.txt:7535:“Leave us in peace, Tholomyès,” said Blachevelle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7539:“Bombarda, Bombance, and Bambochel!” cried Listolier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7545:“Tholomyès,” remarked Blachevelle, “contemplate my calmness [_mon
tests/les_miserables.txt:7546:calme_].”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7551:This mediocre play upon words produced the effect of a stone in a pool.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7552:The Marquis de Montcalm was at that time a celebrated royalist. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7553:frogs held their peace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7555:“Friends,” cried Tholomyès, with the accent of a man who had recovered
tests/les_miserables.txt:7556:his empire, “Come to yourselves. This pun which has fallen from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7557:skies must not be received with too much stupor. Everything which falls
tests/les_miserables.txt:7558:in that way is not necessarily worthy of enthusiasm and respect. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:7559:pun is the dung of the mind which soars. The jest falls, no matter
tests/les_miserables.txt:7560:where; and the mind after producing a piece of stupidity plunges into
tests/les_miserables.txt:7561:the azure depths. A whitish speck flattened against the rock does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:7562:prevent the condor from soaring aloft. Far be it from me to insult the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7564:august, the most sublime, the most charming of humanity, and perhaps
tests/les_miserables.txt:7566:Peter, Moses on Isaac, Æschylus on Polynices, Cleopatra on Octavius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7567:And observe that Cleopatra’s pun preceded the battle of Actium, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:7568:that had it not been for it, no one would have remembered the city of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7569:Toryne, a Greek name which signifies a ladle. That once conceded, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:7571:hubbub, no excess; even in witticisms, gayety, jollities, or plays on
tests/les_miserables.txt:7572:words. Listen to me. I have the prudence of Amphiaraüs and the baldness
tests/les_miserables.txt:7576:turnovers, ladies; do not indulge in them to excess. Even in the matter
tests/les_miserables.txt:7577:of turnovers, good sense and art are requisite. Gluttony chastises the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7578:glutton, _Gula punit Gulax_. Indigestion is charged by the good God
tests/les_miserables.txt:7579:with preaching morality to stomachs. And remember this: each one of our
tests/les_miserables.txt:7580:passions, even love, has a stomach which must not be filled too full.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7582:self-control must be exercised when the matter becomes urgent; the bolt
tests/les_miserables.txt:7584:violin, and carry one’s self to the post. The sage is the man who knows
tests/les_miserables.txt:7585:how, at a given moment, to effect his own arrest. Have some confidence
tests/les_miserables.txt:7586:in me, for I have succeeded to some extent in my study of the law,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7587:according to the verdict of my examinations, for I know the difference
tests/les_miserables.txt:7589:a thesis in Latin upon the manner in which torture was administered at
tests/les_miserables.txt:7590:Rome at the epoch when Munatius Demens was quæstor of the Parricide;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7591:because I am going to be a doctor, apparently it does not follow that
tests/les_miserables.txt:7592:it is absolutely necessary that I should be an imbecile. I recommend
tests/les_miserables.txt:7595:a heroic resolve, and abdicates like Sylla or Origenes.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7606:“Quirites, gentlemen, caballeros, my friends. Do you wish never to feel
tests/les_miserables.txt:7607:the prick, to do without the nuptial bed, and to brave love? Nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:7608:more simple. Here is the receipt: lemonade, excessive exercise, hard
tests/les_miserables.txt:7609:labor; work yourself to death, drag blocks, sleep not, hold vigil,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7611:emulsions of poppies and agnus castus; season this with a strict diet,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7612:starve yourself, and add thereto cold baths, girdles of herbs, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7613:application of a plate of lead, lotions made with the subacetate of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7614:lead, and fomentations of oxycrat.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7625:“Tholomyès!” cried Blachevelle, “you are drunk!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7630:“Then be gay,” resumed Blachevelle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7636:“Glory to wine! _Nunc te, Bacche, canam!_ Pardon me ladies; that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:7637:Spanish. And the proof of it, señoras, is this: like people, like cask.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7638:The arrobe of Castille contains sixteen litres; the cantaro of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7639:Alicante, twelve; the almude of the Canaries, twenty-five; the cuartin
tests/les_miserables.txt:7640:of the Balearic Isles, twenty-six; the boot of Tzar Peter, thirty. Long
tests/les_miserables.txt:7641:live that Tzar who was great, and long live his boot, which was still
tests/les_miserables.txt:7642:greater! Ladies, take the advice of a friend; make a mistake in your
tests/les_miserables.txt:7644:is not made to crouch down and brutalize itself like an English
tests/les_miserables.txt:7645:serving-maid who has callouses on her knees from scrubbing. It is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:7648:Joséphine, face more than irregular, you would be charming were you not
tests/les_miserables.txt:7649:all askew. You have the air of a pretty face upon which some one has
tests/les_miserables.txt:7651:Blachevelle was crossing the gutter in the Rue Guérin-Boisseau, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:7652:espied a beautiful girl with white stockings well drawn up, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:7653:displayed her legs. This prologue pleased him, and Blachevelle fell in
tests/les_miserables.txt:7657:thy mouth. Listen! before thee, there was never a creature worthy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7658:the name. Thou wert made to receive the apple like Venus, or to eat it
tests/les_miserables.txt:7660:thou who hast created her. Thou deservest the letters-patent of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7661:beautiful woman. O Favourite, I cease to address you as ‘thou,’ because
tests/les_miserables.txt:7663:while ago. That touched me; but let us, whoever we may be, distrust
tests/les_miserables.txt:7664:names. They may delude us. I am called Félix, and I am not happy. Words
tests/les_miserables.txt:7665:are liars. Let us not blindly accept the indications which they afford
tests/les_miserables.txt:7666:us. It would be a mistake to write to Liège 2 for corks, and to Pau for
tests/les_miserables.txt:7667:gloves. Miss Dahlia, were I in your place, I would call myself Rosa. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:7675:than are in existence. O Fantine, know this: I, Tholomyès, I am an
tests/les_miserables.txt:7678:sweet morning light. O Fantine, maid worthy of being called Marguerite
tests/les_miserables.txt:7679:or Pearl, you are a woman from the beauteous Orient. Ladies, a second
tests/les_miserables.txt:7680:piece of advice: do not marry; marriage is a graft; it takes well or
tests/les_miserables.txt:7682:Girls are incurable on the subject of marriage, and all that we wise
tests/les_miserables.txt:7683:men can say will not prevent the waistcoat-makers and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7684:shoe-stitchers from dreaming of husbands studded with diamonds. Well,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7685:so be it; but, my beauties, remember this, you eat too much sugar. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:7688:sugar is a salt. All salts are withering. Sugar is the most desiccating
tests/les_miserables.txt:7689:of all salts; it sucks the liquids of the blood through the veins;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7690:hence the coagulation, and then the solidification of the blood; hence
tests/les_miserables.txt:7691:tubercles in the lungs, hence death. That is why diabetes borders on
tests/les_miserables.txt:7692:consumption. Then, do not crunch sugar, and you will live. I turn to
tests/les_miserables.txt:7693:the men: gentlemen, make conquest, rob each other of your well-beloved
tests/les_miserables.txt:7694:without remorse. Chassez across. In love there are no friends.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7696:war to the death! a pretty woman is a _casus belli_; a pretty woman is
tests/les_miserables.txt:7698:by petticoats. Woman is man’s right. Romulus carried off the Sabines;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7699:William carried off the Saxon women; Cæsar carried off the Roman women.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7702:widowers, I throw the sublime proclamation of Bonaparte to the army of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7708:“Take breath, Tholomyès,” said Blachevelle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7710:At the same moment Blachevelle, supported by Listolier and Fameuil,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7711:struck up to a plaintive air, one of those studio songs composed of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7712:first words which come to hand, rhymed richly and not at all, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:7714:wind, which have their birth in the vapor of pipes, and are dissipated
tests/les_miserables.txt:7715:and take their flight with them. This is the couplet by which the group
tests/les_miserables.txt:7718:“The father turkey-cocks so grave
tests/les_miserables.txt:7722:But this good Clermont could not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:7723:Made pope, because no priest was he;
tests/les_miserables.txt:7725:With all their money back returned.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7728:This was not calculated to calm Tholomyès’ improvisation; he emptied
tests/les_miserables.txt:7733:merry. Let us complete our course of law by folly and eating!
tests/les_miserables.txt:7735:the female! Joy in the depths! Live, O creation! The world is a great
tests/les_miserables.txt:7738:thee! O Luxembourg! O Georgics of the Rue Madame, and of the Allée de
tests/les_miserables.txt:7739:l’Observatoire! O pensive infantry soldiers! O all those charming
tests/les_miserables.txt:7740:nurses who, while they guard the children, amuse themselves! The pampas
tests/les_miserables.txt:7741:of America would please me if I had not the arcades of the Odéon. My
tests/les_miserables.txt:7744:humming bird. Embrace me, Fantine!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7747:He made a mistake and embraced Favourite.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7755:“The dinners are better at Édon’s than at Bombarda’s,” exclaimed
tests/les_miserables.txt:7758:“I prefer Bombarda to Édon,” declared Blachevelle. “There is more
tests/les_miserables.txt:7759:luxury. It is more Asiatic. Look at the room downstairs; there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:7760:mirrors [_glaces_] on the walls.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7763:“I prefer them [_glaces_, ices] on my plate,” said Favourite.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7765:Blachevelle persisted:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7771:“Except for those who have a silver chin,” observed Tholomyès.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7773:He was looking at the dome of the Invalides, which was visible from
tests/les_miserables.txt:7778:“Tholomyès,” exclaimed Fameuil, “Listolier and I were having a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7779:discussion just now.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7782:“A discussion is a good thing,” replied Tholomyès; “a quarrel is
tests/les_miserables.txt:7792:“Which do you prefer, Descartes or Spinoza?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7797:This decree pronounced, he took a drink, and went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7799:“I consent to live. All is not at an end on earth since we can still
tests/les_miserables.txt:7801:One lies, but one laughs. One affirms, but one doubts. The unexpected
tests/les_miserables.txt:7803:beings here below who know how to open and close the surprise box of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7804:the paradox merrily. This, ladies, which you are drinking with so
tests/les_miserables.txt:7806:Coural das Freiras, which is three hundred and seventeen fathoms above
tests/les_miserables.txt:7808:seventeen fathoms! and Monsieur Bombarda, the magnificent eating-house
tests/les_miserables.txt:7810:francs and fifty centimes.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7827:And Tholomyès continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7829:“Honor to Bombarda! He would equal Munophis of Elephanta if he could
tests/les_miserables.txt:7830:but get me an Indian dancing-girl, and Thygelion of Chæronea if he
tests/les_miserables.txt:7831:could bring me a Greek courtesan; for, oh, ladies! there were Bombardas
tests/les_miserables.txt:7832:in Greece and in Egypt. Apuleius tells us of them. Alas! always the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7833:same, and nothing new; nothing more unpublished by the creator in
tests/les_miserables.txt:7834:creation! _Nil sub sole novum_, says Solomon; _amor omnibus idem_, says
tests/les_miserables.txt:7836:as Aspasia embarked with Pericles upon the fleet at Samos. One last
tests/les_miserables.txt:7838:epoch when women had, as yet, no soul, she was a soul; a soul of a rosy
tests/les_miserables.txt:7840:Aspasia was a creature in whom two extremes of womanhood met; she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:7841:the goddess prostitute; Socrates plus Manon Lescaut. Aspasia was
tests/les_miserables.txt:7842:created in case a mistress should be needed for Prometheus.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7845:Tholomyès, once started, would have found some difficulty in stopping,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7847:shock caused the cart and the orator to come to a dead halt. It was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7848:Beauceron mare, old and thin, and one fit for the knacker, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:7849:dragging a very heavy cart. On arriving in front of Bombarda’s, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7850:worn-out, exhausted beast had refused to proceed any further. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:7851:incident attracted a crowd. Hardly had the cursing and indignant carter
tests/les_miserables.txt:7852:had time to utter with proper energy the sacramental word, _Mâtin_ (the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7853:jade), backed up with a pitiless cut of the whip, when the jade fell,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7856:advantage of the opportunity to bring his allocution to a close with
tests/les_miserables.txt:7857:this melancholy strophe:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7859:“Elle était de ce monde ou coucous et carrosses
tests/les_miserables.txt:7861:Et, rosse, elle a vécu ce que vivant les rosses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7862:L’espace d’un mâtin!” 3
tests/les_miserables.txt:7866:And Dahlia exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7868:“There is Fantine on the point of crying over horses. How can one be
tests/les_miserables.txt:7869:such a pitiful fool as that!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7872:At that moment Favourite, folding her arms and throwing her head back,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7878:“Exactly. The moment has arrived,” replied Tholomyès. “Gentlemen, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7879:hour for giving these ladies a surprise has struck. Wait for us a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7883:“It begins with a kiss,” said Blachevelle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7887:Each gravely bestowed a kiss on his mistress’s brow; then all four
tests/les_miserables.txt:7890:Favourite clapped her hands on their departure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7904:window-sills, chatting, craning out their heads, and talking from one
tests/les_miserables.txt:7909:that dusty Sunday throng which makes a weekly invasion into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7912:“Don’t be long!” cried Fantine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7916:“It will certainly be something pretty,” said Dahlia.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7921:Their attention was soon distracted by the movements on the shore of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7922:the lake, which they could see through the branches of the large trees,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7923:and which diverted them greatly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7925:It was the hour for the departure of the mail-coaches and diligences.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7926:Nearly all the stage-coaches for the south and west passed through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7928:Passy Barrier. From moment to moment, some huge vehicle, painted yellow
tests/les_miserables.txt:7929:and black, heavily loaded, noisily harnessed, rendered shapeless by
tests/les_miserables.txt:7930:trunks, tarpaulins, and valises, full of heads which immediately
tests/les_miserables.txt:7931:disappeared, rushed through the crowd with all the sparks of a forge,
tests/les_miserables.txt:7933:changing all the paving-stones into steels. This uproar delighted the
tests/les_miserables.txt:7934:young girls. Favourite exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:7936:“What a row! One would say that it was a pile of chains flying away.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7939:It chanced that one of these vehicles, which they could only see with
tests/les_miserables.txt:7940:difficulty through the thick elms, halted for a moment, then set out
tests/les_miserables.txt:7943:“That’s odd!” said she. “I thought the diligence never stopped.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7948:“This Fantine is surprising. I am coming to take a look at her out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:7949:curiosity. She is dazzled by the simplest things. Suppose a case: I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:7950:a traveller; I say to the diligence, ‘I will go on in advance; you
tests/les_miserables.txt:7951:shall pick me up on the quay as you pass.’ The diligence passes, sees
tests/les_miserables.txt:7956:In this manner a certain time elapsed. All at once Favourite made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7967:As Fantine concluded this sigh, the waiter who had served them at
tests/les_miserables.txt:7968:dinner entered. He held in his hand something which resembled a letter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:7977:“Why did you not bring it at once?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:7980:“Because,” said the waiter, “the gentlemen ordered me not to deliver it
tests/les_miserables.txt:7984:Favourite snatched the paper from the waiter’s hand. It was, in fact, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7999:“You must know that we have parents. Parents—you do not know much about
tests/les_miserables.txt:8000:such things. They are called fathers and mothers by the civil code,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8001:which is puerile and honest. Now, these parents groan, these old folks
tests/les_miserables.txt:8002:implore us, these good men and these good women call us prodigal sons;
tests/les_miserables.txt:8003:they desire our return, and offer to kill calves for us. Being
tests/les_miserables.txt:8007:arms of Laffitte and on the wings of Caillard. The Toulouse diligence
tests/les_miserables.txt:8009:We return to society, to duty, to respectability, at full trot, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8010:rate of three leagues an hour. It is necessary for the good of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8011:country that we should be, like the rest of the world, prefects,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8012:fathers of families, rural police, and councillors of state. Venerate
tests/les_miserables.txt:8013:us. We are sacrificing ourselves. Mourn for us in haste, and replace us
tests/les_miserables.txt:8014:with speed. If this letter lacerates you, do the same by it. Adieu.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8016:“For the space of nearly two years we have made you happy. We bear you
tests/les_miserables.txt:8024:“_Postscriptum_. The dinner is paid for.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8027:The four young women looked at each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8029:Favourite was the first to break the silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8031:“Well!” she exclaimed, “it’s a very pretty farce, all the same.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8036:“That must have been Blachevelle’s idea,” resumed Favourite. “It makes
tests/les_miserables.txt:8043:“In that case,” retorted Favourite, “death to Blachevelle, and long
tests/les_miserables.txt:8047:“Long live Tholomyès!” exclaimed Dahlia and Zéphine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8055:Tholomyès as to a husband, and the poor girl had a child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8069:century, a sort of cook-shop which no longer exists. This cook-shop was
tests/les_miserables.txt:8072:the wall. Upon this board was painted something which resembled a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:8073:carrying another man on his back, the latter wearing the big gilt
tests/les_miserables.txt:8075:blood; the rest of the picture consisted of smoke, and probably
tests/les_miserables.txt:8076:represented a battle. Below ran this inscription: AT THE SIGN OF
tests/les_miserables.txt:8079:Nothing is more common than a cart or a truck at the door of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8080:hostelry. Nevertheless, the vehicle, or, to speak more accurately, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8081:fragment of a vehicle, which encumbered the street in front of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8082:cook-shop of the _Sergeant of Waterloo_, one evening in the spring of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8083:1818, would certainly have attracted, by its mass, the attention of any
tests/les_miserables.txt:8086:It was the fore-carriage of one of those trucks which are used in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8087:wooded tracts of country, and which serve to transport thick planks and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8088:the trunks of trees. This fore-carriage was composed of a massive iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:8089:axle-tree with a pivot, into which was fitted a heavy shaft, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8090:was supported by two huge wheels. The whole thing was compact,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8091:overwhelming, and misshapen. It seemed like the gun-carriage of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:8092:enormous cannon. The ruts of the road had bestowed on the wheels, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8094:yellowish daubing hue, tolerably like that with which people are fond
tests/les_miserables.txt:8095:of ornamenting cathedrals. The wood was disappearing under mud, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8097:chain, worthy of some Goliath of a convict. This chain suggested, not
tests/les_miserables.txt:8098:the beams, which it was its office to transport, but the mastodons and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8099:mammoths which it might have served to harness; it had the air of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8100:galleys, but of cyclopean and superhuman galleys, and it seemed to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:8101:been detached from some monster. Homer would have bound Polyphemus with
tests/les_miserables.txt:8104:Why was that fore-carriage of a truck in that place in the street? In
tests/les_miserables.txt:8105:the first place, to encumber the street; next, in order that it might
tests/les_miserables.txt:8106:finish the process of rusting. There is a throng of institutions in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8107:old social order, which one comes across in this fashion as one walks
tests/les_miserables.txt:8108:about outdoors, and which have no other reasons for existence than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8111:The centre of the chain swung very near the ground in the middle, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8113:on that particular evening, in exquisite interlacement, two little
tests/les_miserables.txt:8115:the younger in the arms of the other. A handkerchief, cleverly knotted
tests/les_miserables.txt:8116:about them, prevented their falling out. A mother had caught sight of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8117:that frightful chain, and had said, “Come! there’s a plaything for my
tests/les_miserables.txt:8118:children.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8121:The two children, who were dressed prettily and with some elegance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8123:roses amid old iron; their eyes were a triumph; their fresh cheeks were
tests/les_miserables.txt:8124:full of laughter. One had chestnut hair; the other, brown. Their
tests/les_miserables.txt:8125:innocent faces were two delighted surprises; a blossoming shrub which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8126:grew near wafted to the passers-by perfumes which seemed to emanate
tests/les_miserables.txt:8127:from them; the child of eighteen months displayed her pretty little
tests/les_miserables.txt:8128:bare stomach with the chaste indecency of childhood. Above and around
tests/les_miserables.txt:8129:these two delicate heads, all made of happiness and steeped in light,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8130:the gigantic fore-carriage, black with rust, almost terrible, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:8131:entangled in curves and wild angles, rose in a vault, like the entrance
tests/les_miserables.txt:8132:of a cavern. A few paces apart, crouching down upon the threshold of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8134:though touching at that moment, was swinging the two children by means
tests/les_miserables.txt:8135:of a long cord, watching them carefully, for fear of accidents, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:8136:that animal and celestial expression which is peculiar to maternity. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:8137:every backward and forward swing the hideous links emitted a strident
tests/les_miserables.txt:8138:sound, which resembled a cry of rage; the little girls were in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8139:ecstasies; the setting sun mingled in this joy, and nothing could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:8140:more charming than this caprice of chance which had made of a chain of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8141:Titans the swing of cherubim.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8143:As she rocked her little ones, the mother hummed in a discordant voice
tests/les_miserables.txt:8144:a romance then celebrated:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:8149:Her song, and the contemplation of her daughters, prevented her hearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:8152:In the meantime, some one had approached her, as she was beginning the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8153:first couplet of the romance, and suddenly she heard a voice saying
tests/les_miserables.txt:8156:“You have two beautiful children there, Madame.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8162:replied the mother, continuing her romance; then she turned her head.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8164:A woman stood before her, a few paces distant. This woman also had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8165:child, which she carried in her arms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8167:She was carrying, in addition, a large carpet-bag, which seemed very
tests/les_miserables.txt:8170:This woman’s child was one of the most divine creatures that it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:8171:possible to behold. It was a girl, two or three years of age. She could
tests/les_miserables.txt:8172:have entered into competition with the two other little ones, so far as
tests/les_miserables.txt:8173:the coquetry of her dress was concerned; she wore a cap of fine linen,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8174:ribbons on her bodice, and Valenciennes lace on her cap. The folds of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8177:inspired a desire to take a bite from the apples of her cheeks. Of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8178:eyes nothing could be known, except that they must be very large, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8179:that they had magnificent lashes. She was asleep.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8181:She slept with that slumber of absolute confidence peculiar to her age.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8182:The arms of mothers are made of tenderness; in them children sleep
tests/les_miserables.txt:8185:As for the mother, her appearance was sad and poverty-stricken. She was
tests/les_miserables.txt:8186:dressed like a working-woman who is inclined to turn into a peasant
tests/les_miserables.txt:8188:was not apparent. Her hair, a golden lock of which had escaped, seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:8189:very thick, but was severely concealed beneath an ugly, tight, close,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8190:nun-like cap, tied under the chin. A smile displays beautiful teeth
tests/les_miserables.txt:8193:rather sickly appearance. She gazed upon her daughter asleep in her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8194:arms with the air peculiar to a mother who has nursed her own child. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:8195:large blue handkerchief, such as the Invalides use, was folded into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8196:fichu, and concealed her figure clumsily. Her hands were sunburnt and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8197:all dotted with freckles, her forefinger was hardened and lacerated
tests/les_miserables.txt:8198:with the needle; she wore a cloak of coarse brown woollen stuff, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8199:linen gown, and coarse shoes. It was Fantine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8201:It was Fantine, but difficult to recognize. Nevertheless, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:8202:scrutinizing her attentively, it was evident that she still retained
tests/les_miserables.txt:8203:her beauty. A melancholy fold, which resembled the beginning of irony,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8204:wrinkled her right cheek. As for her toilette, that aerial toilette of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8205:muslin and ribbons, which seemed made of mirth, of folly, and of music,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8206:full of bells, and perfumed with lilacs had vanished like that
tests/les_miserables.txt:8207:beautiful and dazzling hoar-frost which is mistaken for diamonds in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8208:sunlight; it melts and leaves the branch quite black.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8210:Ten months had elapsed since the “pretty farce.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8213:What had taken place during those ten months? It can be divined.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8215:After abandonment, straightened circumstances. Fantine had immediately
tests/les_miserables.txt:8216:lost sight of Favourite, Zéphine and Dahlia; the bond once broken on
tests/les_miserables.txt:8219:they had been friends; there no longer existed any reason for such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8220:thing. Fantine had remained alone. The father of her child gone,—alas!
tests/les_miserables.txt:8221:such ruptures are irrevocable,—she found herself absolutely isolated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8223:her _liaison_ with Tholomyès to disdain the pretty trade which she
tests/les_miserables.txt:8224:knew, she had neglected to keep her market open; it was now closed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8225:her. She had no resource. Fantine barely knew how to read, and did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:8226:know how to write; in her childhood she had only been taught to sign
tests/les_miserables.txt:8227:her name; she had a public letter-writer indite an epistle to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8228:Tholomyès, then a second, then a third. Tholomyès replied to none of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8229:them. Fantine heard the gossips say, as they looked at her child: “Who
tests/les_miserables.txt:8230:takes those children seriously! One only shrugs one’s shoulders over
tests/les_miserables.txt:8231:such children!” Then she thought of Tholomyès, who had shrugged his
tests/les_miserables.txt:8232:shoulders over his child, and who did not take that innocent being
tests/les_miserables.txt:8234:to do? She no longer knew to whom to apply. She had committed a fault,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8236:and virtue. She was vaguely conscious that she was on the verge of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8238:necessary; she possessed it, and held herself firm. The idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8239:returning to her native town of M. sur M. occurred to her. There, some
tests/les_miserables.txt:8241:necessary to conceal her fault. In a confused way she perceived the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8242:necessity of a separation which would be more painful than the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:8243:one. Her heart contracted, but she took her resolution. Fantine, as we
tests/les_miserables.txt:8244:shall see, had the fierce bravery of life. She had already valiantly
tests/les_miserables.txt:8245:renounced finery, had dressed herself in linen, and had put all her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8246:silks, all her ornaments, all her ribbons, and all her laces on her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8247:daughter, the only vanity which was left to her, and a holy one it was.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8248:She sold all that she had, which produced for her two hundred francs;
tests/les_miserables.txt:8249:her little debts paid, she had only about eighty francs left. At the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8251:bearing her child on her back. Any one who had seen these two pass
tests/les_miserables.txt:8253:but her child, and the child had, in all the world, no one but this
tests/les_miserables.txt:8254:woman. Fantine had nursed her child, and this had tired her chest, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8255:she coughed a little.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8257:We shall have no further occasion to speak of M. Félix Tholomyès. Let
tests/les_miserables.txt:8258:us confine ourselves to saying, that, twenty years later, under King
tests/les_miserables.txt:8259:Louis Philippe, he was a great provincial lawyer, wealthy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8260:influential, a wise elector, and a very severe juryman; he was still a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8266:the “little suburban coach service,” Fantine found herself at
tests/les_miserables.txt:8273:Charms exist. These two little girls were a charm to this mother.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8275:She gazed at them in much emotion. The presence of angels is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:8276:announcement of Paradise. She thought that, above this inn, she beheld
tests/les_miserables.txt:8277:the mysterious HERE of Providence. These two little creatures were
tests/les_miserables.txt:8278:evidently happy. She gazed at them, she admired them, in such emotion
tests/les_miserables.txt:8279:that at the moment when their mother was recovering her breath between
tests/les_miserables.txt:8280:two couplets of her song, she could not refrain from addressing to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8281:the remark which we have just read:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:8283:“You have two pretty children, Madame.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8286:The most ferocious creatures are disarmed by caresses bestowed on their
tests/les_miserables.txt:8290:down on the bench at the door, she herself being seated on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8291:threshold. The two women began to chat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8297:Then, her mind still running on her romance, she resumed humming
tests/les_miserables.txt:8304:This Madame Thénardier was a sandy-complexioned woman, thin and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8306:what was odd, with a languishing air, which she owed to her perusal of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8307:romances. She was a simpering, but masculine creature. Old romances
tests/les_miserables.txt:8308:produce that effect when rubbed against the imagination of cook-shop
tests/les_miserables.txt:8309:woman. She was still young; she was barely thirty. If this crouching
tests/les_miserables.txt:8311:perambulating colossus suitable for fairs, might have frightened the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8312:traveller at the outset, troubled her confidence, and disturbed what
tests/les_miserables.txt:8313:caused what we have to relate to vanish. A person who is seated instead
tests/les_miserables.txt:8314:of standing erect—destinies hang upon such a thing as that.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8316:The traveller told her story, with slight modifications.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8321:morning on foot; that, as she was carrying her child, and felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:8322:fatigued, she had got into the Villemomble coach when she met it; that
tests/les_miserables.txt:8323:from Villemomble she had come to Montfermeil on foot; that the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:8324:one had walked a little, but not much, because she was so young, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8328:At this word she bestowed on her daughter a passionate kiss, which woke
tests/les_miserables.txt:8329:her. The child opened her eyes, great blue eyes like her mother’s, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8331:little children, which is a mystery of their luminous innocence in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8332:presence of our twilight of virtue. One would say that they feel
tests/les_miserables.txt:8334:child began to laugh; and although the mother held fast to her, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:8335:slipped to the ground with the unconquerable energy of a little being
tests/les_miserables.txt:8336:which wished to run. All at once she caught sight of the two others in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8340:Mother Thénardier released her daughters, made them descend from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8346:Children become acquainted quickly at that age, and at the expiration
tests/les_miserables.txt:8347:of a minute the little Thénardiers were playing with the newcomer at
tests/les_miserables.txt:8348:making holes in the ground, which was an immense pleasure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8350:The newcomer was very gay; the goodness of the mother is written in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8351:gayety of the child; she had seized a scrap of wood which served her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8352:for a shovel, and energetically dug a cavity big enough for a fly. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:8353:grave-digger’s business becomes a subject for laughter when performed
tests/les_miserables.txt:8354:by a child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8356:The two women pursued their chat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8364:For Cosette, read Euphrasie. The child’s name was Euphrasie. But out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8365:Euphrasie the mother had made Cosette by that sweet and graceful
tests/les_miserables.txt:8366:instinct of mothers and of the populace which changes Josepha into
tests/les_miserables.txt:8367:Pepita, and Françoise into Sillette. It is a sort of derivative which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8368:disarranges and disconcerts the whole science of etymologists. We have
tests/les_miserables.txt:8369:known a grandmother who succeeded in turning Theodore into Gnon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8383:ecstasies over it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8385:Their radiant brows touched each other; one would have said that there
tests/les_miserables.txt:8388:“How easily children get acquainted at once!” exclaimed Mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:8392:This remark was probably the spark which the other mother had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:8396:“Will you keep my child for me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8399:The Thénardier made one of those movements of surprise which signify
tests/les_miserables.txt:8402:Cosette’s mother continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:8404:“You see, I cannot take my daughter to the country. My work will not
tests/les_miserables.txt:8405:permit it. With a child one can find no situation. People are
tests/les_miserables.txt:8406:ridiculous in the country. It was the good God who caused me to pass
tests/les_miserables.txt:8407:your inn. When I caught sight of your little ones, so pretty, so clean,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8410:be long before I return. Will you keep my child for me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8415:“I will give you six francs a month.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8418:Here a man’s voice called from the depths of the cook-shop:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:8420:“Not for less than seven francs. And six months paid in advance.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8427:“And fifteen francs in addition for preliminary expenses,” added the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8428:man’s voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8430:“Total, fifty-seven francs,” said Madame Thénardier. And she hummed
tests/les_miserables.txt:8436:“I will pay it,” said the mother. “I have eighty francs. I shall have
tests/les_miserables.txt:8437:enough left to reach the country, by travelling on foot. I shall earn
tests/les_miserables.txt:8442:The man’s voice resumed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:8449:“Of course she has an outfit, the poor treasure.—I understood perfectly
tests/les_miserables.txt:8452:here, in my carpet-bag.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8455:“You must hand it over,” struck in the man’s voice again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8457:“Of course I shall give it to you,” said the mother. “It would be very
tests/les_miserables.txt:8461:The master’s face appeared.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8465:The bargain was concluded. The mother passed the night at the inn, gave
tests/les_miserables.txt:8466:up her money and left her child, fastened her carpet-bag once more, now
tests/les_miserables.txt:8467:reduced in volume by the removal of the outfit, and light henceforth
tests/les_miserables.txt:8469:arrange such departures tranquilly; but they are despairs!
tests/les_miserables.txt:8472:and came back with the remark:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:8474:“I have just seen a woman crying in the street so that it was enough to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8481:“That will serve to pay my note for one hundred and ten francs which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8482:falls due to-morrow; I lacked fifty francs. Do you know that I should
tests/les_miserables.txt:8484:nicely with your young ones.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8487:“Without suspecting it,” said the woman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8495:The mouse which had been caught was a pitiful specimen; but the cat
tests/les_miserables.txt:8496:rejoices even over a lean mouse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8500:Let us say a word or two of them now. We will complete the sketch later
tests/les_miserables.txt:8503:These beings belonged to that bastard class composed of coarse people
tests/les_miserables.txt:8504:who have been successful, and of intelligent people who have descended
tests/les_miserables.txt:8505:in the scale, which is between the class called “middle” and the class
tests/les_miserables.txt:8506:denominated as “inferior,” and which combines some of the defects of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8507:the second with nearly all the vices of the first, without possessing
tests/les_miserables.txt:8511:They were of those dwarfed natures which, if a dull fire chances to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8512:warm them up, easily become monstrous. There was in the woman a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8513:substratum of the brute, and in the man the material for a blackguard.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8514:Both were susceptible, in the highest degree, of the sort of hideous
tests/les_miserables.txt:8515:progress which is accomplished in the direction of evil. There exist
tests/les_miserables.txt:8516:crab-like souls which are continually retreating towards the darkness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8517:retrograding in life rather than advancing, employing experience to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8518:augment their deformity, growing incessantly worse, and becoming more
tests/les_miserables.txt:8519:and more impregnated with an ever-augmenting blackness. This man and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8520:woman possessed such souls.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8522:Thénardier, in particular, was troublesome for a physiognomist. One can
tests/les_miserables.txt:8524:dark in both directions. They are uneasy in the rear and threatening in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8525:front. There is something of the unknown about them. One can no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:8527:which they bear in their glance denounces them. From merely hearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:8529:of sombre secrets in their past and of sombre mysteries in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:8533:sergeant, he said. He had probably been through the campaign of 1815,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8534:and had even conducted himself with tolerable valor, it would seem. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:8535:shall see later on how much truth there was in this. The sign of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:8539:It was at the epoch when the ancient classical romance which, after
tests/les_miserables.txt:8542:de Scudéri to Madame Bournon-Malarme, and from Madame de Lafayette to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8548:later, a sort of pensive attitude towards her husband, a scamp of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8549:certain depth, a ruffian lettered to the extent of the grammar, coarse
tests/les_miserables.txt:8551:concerned, given to the perusal of Pigault-Lebrun, and “in what
tests/les_miserables.txt:8552:concerns the sex,” as he said in his jargon—a downright, unmitigated
tests/les_miserables.txt:8554:on, when her hair, arranged in a romantically drooping fashion, began
tests/les_miserables.txt:8556:the female Thénardier was nothing but a coarse, vicious woman, who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:8557:dabbled in stupid romances. Now, one cannot read nonsense with
tests/les_miserables.txt:8559:for the younger, the poor little thing came near being called Gulnare;
tests/les_miserables.txt:8560:I know not to what diversion, effected by a romance of Ducray-Dumenil,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8561:she owed the fact that she merely bore the name of Azelma.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8563:However, we will remark by the way, everything was not ridiculous and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8564:superficial in that curious epoch to which we are alluding, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8565:may be designated as the anarchy of baptismal names. By the side of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8566:this romantic element which we have just indicated there is the social
tests/les_miserables.txt:8568:name of Arthur, Alfred, or Alphonse, and for the vicomte—if there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:8569:still any vicomtes—to be called Thomas, Pierre, or Jacques. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:8570:displacement, which places the “elegant” name on the plebeian and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8571:rustic name on the aristocrat, is nothing else than an eddy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8573:as everywhere else. Beneath this apparent discord there is a great and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8574:a profound thing,—the French Revolution.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8582:It is not all in all sufficient to be wicked in order to prosper. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:8583:cook-shop was in a bad way.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8585:Thanks to the traveller’s fifty-seven francs, Thénardier had been able
tests/les_miserables.txt:8588:Paris, and pawned it at the pawnbroker’s for sixty francs. As soon as
tests/les_miserables.txt:8589:that sum was spent, the Thénardiers grew accustomed to look on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8590:little girl merely as a child whom they were caring for out of charity;
tests/les_miserables.txt:8591:and they treated her accordingly. As she had no longer any clothes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8592:they dressed her in the cast-off petticoats and chemises of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8595:cat. Moreover, the cat and the dog were her habitual table-companions;
tests/les_miserables.txt:8600:M. sur M., wrote, or, more correctly, caused to be written, a letter
tests/les_miserables.txt:8601:every month, that she might have news of her child. The Thénardiers
tests/les_miserables.txt:8605:At the expiration of the first six months the mother sent seven francs
tests/les_miserables.txt:8606:for the seventh month, and continued her remittances with tolerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:8607:regularity from month to month. The year was not completed when
tests/les_miserables.txt:8609:expect us to do with her seven francs?” and he wrote to demand twelve
tests/les_miserables.txt:8610:francs. The mother, whom they had persuaded into the belief that her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8611:child was happy, “and was coming on well,” submitted, and forwarded the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8612:twelve francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8614:Certain natures cannot love on the one hand without hating on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8615:other. Mother Thénardier loved her two daughters passionately, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8616:caused her to hate the stranger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8618:It is sad to think that the love of a mother can possess villainous
tests/les_miserables.txt:8619:aspects. Little as was the space occupied by Cosette, it seemed to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8620:as though it were taken from her own, and that that little child
tests/les_miserables.txt:8621:diminished the air which her daughters breathed. This woman, like many
tests/les_miserables.txt:8622:women of her sort, had a load of caresses and a burden of blows and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8623:injuries to dispense each day. If she had not had Cosette, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:8624:certain that her daughters, idolized as they were, would have received
tests/les_miserables.txt:8625:the whole of it; but the stranger did them the service to divert the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8626:blows to herself. Her daughters received nothing but caresses. Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:8627:could not make a motion which did not draw down upon her head a heavy
tests/les_miserables.txt:8628:shower of violent blows and unmerited chastisement. The sweet, feeble
tests/les_miserables.txt:8630:incessantly punished, scolded, ill-used, beaten, and seeing beside her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8631:two little creatures like herself, who lived in a ray of dawn!
tests/les_miserables.txt:8633:Madame Thénardier was vicious with Cosette. Éponine and Azelma were
tests/les_miserables.txt:8634:vicious. Children at that age are only copies of their mother. The size
tests/les_miserables.txt:8641:“Those Thénardiers are good people. They are not rich, and yet they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:8642:bringing up a poor child who was abandoned on their hands!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8648:by what obscure means, that the child was probably a bastard, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:8649:the mother could not acknowledge it, exacted fifteen francs a month,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8650:saying that “the creature” was growing and “eating,” and threatening to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8651:send her away. “Let her not bother me,” he exclaimed, “or I’ll fire her
tests/les_miserables.txt:8652:brat right into the middle of her secrets. I must have an increase.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8653:The mother paid the fifteen francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8655:From year to year the child grew, and so did her wretchedness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8657:As long as Cosette was little, she was the scape-goat of the two other
tests/les_miserables.txt:8658:children; as soon as she began to develop a little, that is to say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8659:before she was even five years old, she became the servant of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8663:true. Social suffering begins at all ages. Have we not recently seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:8665:the age of five, as the official documents state, being alone in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8668:Cosette was made to run on errands, to sweep the rooms, the courtyard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8669:the street, to wash the dishes, to even carry burdens. The Thénardiers
tests/les_miserables.txt:8670:considered themselves all the more authorized to behave in this manner,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8671:since the mother, who was still at M. sur M., had become irregular in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8675:years, she would not have recognized her child. Cosette, so pretty and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8677:indescribably uneasy look. “The sly creature,” said the Thénardiers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8679:Injustice had made her peevish, and misery had made her ugly. Nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:8680:remained to her except her beautiful eyes, which inspired pain,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8681:because, large as they were, it seemed as though one beheld in them a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8684:It was a heart-breaking thing to see this poor child, not yet six years
tests/les_miserables.txt:8691:She was called the _Lark_ in the neighborhood. The populace, who are
tests/les_miserables.txt:8692:fond of these figures of speech, had taken a fancy to bestow this name
tests/les_miserables.txt:8693:on this trembling, frightened, and shivering little creature, no bigger
tests/les_miserables.txt:8711:And in the meantime, what had become of that mother who according to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8712:the people at Montfermeil, seemed to have abandoned her child? Where
tests/les_miserables.txt:8716:continued her journey, and had reached M. sur M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8720:Fantine had quitted her province ten years before. M. sur M. had
tests/les_miserables.txt:8721:changed its aspect. While Fantine had been slowly descending from
tests/les_miserables.txt:8722:wretchedness to wretchedness, her native town had prospered.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8724:About two years previously one of those industrial facts which are the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8725:grand events of small districts had taken place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8730:From time immemorial, M. sur M. had had for its special industry the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8731:imitation of English jet and the black glass trinkets of Germany. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:8732:industry had always vegetated, on account of the high price of the raw
tests/les_miserables.txt:8733:material, which reacted on the manufacture. At the moment when Fantine
tests/les_miserables.txt:8734:returned to M. sur M., an unheard-of transformation had taken place in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8735:the production of “black goods.” Towards the close of 1815 a man, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8737:with the idea of substituting, in this manufacture, gum-lac for resin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8738:and, for bracelets in particular, slides of sheet-iron simply laid
tests/les_miserables.txt:8741:This very small change had effected a revolution.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8743:This very small change had, in fact, prodigiously reduced the cost of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8744:the raw material, which had rendered it possible in the first place, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8745:raise the price of manufacture, a benefit to the country; in the second
tests/les_miserables.txt:8746:place, to improve the workmanship, an advantage to the consumer; in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8747:third place, to sell at a lower price, while trebling the profit, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8748:was a benefit to the manufacturer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8752:In less than three years the inventor of this process had become rich,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8753:which is good, and had made every one about him rich, which is better.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8755:of the beginning of his career, very little. It was rumored that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:8756:come to town with very little money, a few hundred francs at the most.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8758:It was from this slender capital, enlisted in the service of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:8760:own fortune, and the fortune of the whole countryside.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8762:On his arrival at M. sur M. he had only the garments, the appearance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8765:It appears that on the very day when he made his obscure entry into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8766:little town of M. sur M., just at nightfall, on a December evening,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8767:knapsack on back and thorn club in hand, a large fire had broken out in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8769:risk of his own life, two children who belonged to the captain of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8771:passport. Afterwards they had learned his name. He was called Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:8780:He was a man about fifty years of age, who had a preoccupied air, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:8781:who was good. That was all that could be said about him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8783:Thanks to the rapid progress of the industry which he had so admirably
tests/les_miserables.txt:8784:reconstructed, M. sur M. had become a rather important centre of trade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8785:Spain, which consumes a good deal of black jet, made enormous purchases
tests/les_miserables.txt:8786:there each year. M. sur M. almost rivalled London and Berlin in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:8787:branch of commerce. Father Madeleine’s profits were such, that at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8788:end of the second year he was able to erect a large factory, in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8790:women. Any one who was hungry could present himself there, and was sure
tests/les_miserables.txt:8794:the women and girls might remain discreet. On this point he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:8795:inflexible. It was the only thing in which he was in a manner
tests/les_miserables.txt:8796:intolerant. He was all the more firmly set on this severity, since M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8797:sur M., being a garrison town, opportunities for corruption abounded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8798:However, his coming had been a boon, and his presence was a godsend.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8800:country; now everything lived with a healthy life of toil. A strong
tests/les_miserables.txt:8801:circulation warmed everything and penetrated everywhere. Slack seasons
tests/les_miserables.txt:8802:and wretchedness were unknown. There was no pocket so obscure that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:8806:Father Madeleine gave employment to every one. He exacted but one
tests/les_miserables.txt:8809:As we have said, in the midst of this activity of which he was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8810:cause and the pivot, Father Madeleine made his fortune; but a singular
tests/les_miserables.txt:8812:his chief care. He appeared to be thinking much of others, and little
tests/les_miserables.txt:8814:thirty thousand francs lodged in his name with Laffitte; but before
tests/les_miserables.txt:8815:reserving these six hundred and thirty thousand francs, he had spent
tests/les_miserables.txt:8819:divided into the upper and the lower town. The lower town, in which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:8820:lived, had but one school, a miserable hovel, which was falling to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8821:ruin: he constructed two, one for girls, the other for boys. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:8822:allotted a salary from his own funds to the two instructors, a salary
tests/les_miserables.txt:8823:twice as large as their meagre official salary, and one day he said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8824:some one who expressed surprise, “The two prime functionaries of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8825:state are the nurse and the schoolmaster.” He created at his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:8826:expense an infant school, a thing then almost unknown in France, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8827:fund for aiding old and infirm workmen. As his factory was a centre, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8828:new quarter, in which there were a good many indigent families, rose
tests/les_miserables.txt:8831:At first, when they watched his beginnings, the good souls said, “He’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:8832:a jolly fellow who means to get rich.” When they saw him enriching the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8833:country before he enriched himself, the good souls said, “He is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:8834:ambitious man.” This seemed all the more probable since the man was
tests/les_miserables.txt:8835:religious, and even practised his religion to a certain degree, a thing
tests/les_miserables.txt:8836:which was very favorably viewed at that epoch. He went regularly to low
tests/les_miserables.txt:8837:mass every Sunday. The local deputy, who nosed out all rivalry
tests/les_miserables.txt:8841:Fouché, Duc d’Otrante, whose creature and friend he had been. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:8842:indulged in gentle raillery at God with closed doors. But when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:8843:beheld the wealthy manufacturer Madeleine going to low mass at seven
tests/les_miserables.txt:8844:o’clock, he perceived in him a possible candidate, and resolved to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8845:outdo him; he took a Jesuit confessor, and went to high mass and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8846:vespers. Ambition was at that time, in the direct acceptation of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8847:word, a race to the steeple. The poor profited by this terror as well
tests/les_miserables.txt:8849:hospital, which made twelve.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8851:Nevertheless, in 1819 a rumor one morning circulated through the town
tests/les_miserables.txt:8852:to the effect that, on the representations of the prefect and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8853:consideration of the services rendered by him to the country, Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:8855:had pronounced this newcomer to be “an ambitious fellow,” seized with
tests/les_miserables.txt:8856:delight on this opportunity which all men desire, to exclaim, “There!
tests/les_miserables.txt:8861:In this same year of 1819 the products of the new process invented by
tests/les_miserables.txt:8863:their report, the King appointed the inventor a chevalier of the Legion
tests/les_miserables.txt:8864:of Honor. A fresh excitement in the little town. Well, so it was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8865:cross that he wanted! Father Madeleine refused the cross.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8867:Decidedly this man was an enigma. The good souls got out of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:8868:predicament by saying, “After all, he is some sort of an adventurer.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8871:We have seen that the country owed much to him; the poor owed him
tests/les_miserables.txt:8873:obliged to honor and respect him. His workmen, in particular, adored
tests/les_miserables.txt:8874:him, and he endured this adoration with a sort of melancholy gravity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8875:When he was known to be rich, “people in society” bowed to him, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:8876:received invitations in the town; he was called, in town, Monsieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:8877:Madeleine; his workmen and the children continued to call him Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:8880:“Society” claimed him for its own. The prim little drawing-rooms on M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8881:sur M., which, of course, had at first been closed to the artisan,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8883:made a thousand advances to him. He refused.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8886:no education. No one knows where he came from. He would not know how to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8887:behave in society. It has not been absolutely proved that he knows how
tests/les_miserables.txt:8892:When they saw him scattering his money about, they said, “He is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:8893:ambitious man.” When he was seen to decline honors, they said, “He is
tests/les_miserables.txt:8894:an adventurer.” When they saw him repulse society, they said, “He is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8898:In 1820, five years after his arrival in M. sur M., the services which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8899:he had rendered to the district were so dazzling, the opinion of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8900:whole country round about was so unanimous, that the King again
tests/les_miserables.txt:8901:appointed him mayor of the town. He again declined; but the prefect
tests/les_miserables.txt:8902:resisted his refusal, all the notabilities of the place came to implore
tests/les_miserables.txt:8904:that he ended by accepting. It was noticed that the thing which seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:8905:chiefly to bring him to a decision was the almost irritated apostrophe
tests/les_miserables.txt:8906:addressed to him by an old woman of the people, who called to him from
tests/les_miserables.txt:8908:drawing back before the good which he can do?”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:8910:This was the third phase of his ascent. Father Madeleine had become
tests/les_miserables.txt:8911:Monsieur Madeleine. Monsieur Madeleine became Monsieur le Maire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8920:gray hair, a serious eye, the sunburned complexion of a laborer, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8922:wide brim, and a long coat of coarse cloth, buttoned to the chin. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:8923:fulfilled his duties as mayor; but, with that exception, he lived in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8925:escaped quickly; he smiled to relieve himself of the necessity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8926:talking; he gave, in order to get rid of the necessity for smiling. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:8927:women said of him, “What a good-natured bear!” His pleasure consisted
tests/les_miserables.txt:8930:He always took his meals alone, with an open book before him, which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:8931:read. He had a well-selected little library. He loved books; books are
tests/les_miserables.txt:8932:cold but safe friends. In proportion as leisure came to him with
tests/les_miserables.txt:8933:fortune, he seemed to take advantage of it to cultivate his mind. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:8934:had been observed that, ever since his arrival at M. sur M., his
tests/les_miserables.txt:8935:language had grown more polished, more choice, and more gentle with
tests/les_miserables.txt:8936:every passing year. He liked to carry a gun with him on his strolls,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8942:prodigiously strong. He offered his assistance to any one who was in
tests/les_miserables.txt:8943:need of it, lifted a horse, released a wheel clogged in the mud, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:8944:stopped a runaway bull by the horns. He always had his pockets full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8949:It was thought that he must, in the past, have lived a country life,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8950:since he knew all sorts of useful secrets, which he taught to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8951:peasants. He taught them how to destroy scurf on wheat, by sprinkling
tests/les_miserables.txt:8952:it and the granary and inundating the cracks in the floor with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8953:solution of common salt; and how to chase away weevils by hanging up
tests/les_miserables.txt:8954:orviot in bloom everywhere, on the walls and the ceilings, among the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8957:He had “recipes” for exterminating from a field, blight, tares,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8958:foxtail, and all parasitic growths which destroy the wheat. He defended
tests/les_miserables.txt:8959:a rabbit warren against rats, simply by the odor of a guinea-pig which
tests/les_miserables.txt:8960:he placed in it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8962:One day he saw some country people busily engaged in pulling up
tests/les_miserables.txt:8963:nettles; he examined the plants, which were uprooted and already dried,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8966:an excellent vegetable; when it is older, it has filaments and fibres
tests/les_miserables.txt:8967:like hemp and flax. Nettle cloth is as good as linen cloth. Chopped up,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8968:nettles are good for poultry; pounded, they are good for horned cattle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8970:animals; the root, mixed with salt, produces a beautiful yellow
tests/les_miserables.txt:8971:coloring-matter. Moreover, it is an excellent hay, which can be cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:8972:twice. And what is required for the nettle? A little soil, no care, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:8973:culture. Only the seed falls as it is ripe, and it is difficult to
tests/les_miserables.txt:8974:collect it. That is all. With the exercise of a little care, the nettle
tests/les_miserables.txt:8975:could be made useful; it is neglected and it becomes hurtful. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:8977:pause: “Remember this, my friends: there are no such things as bad
tests/les_miserables.txt:8978:plants or bad men. There are only bad cultivators.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:8981:The children loved him because he knew how to make charming little
tests/les_miserables.txt:8982:trifles of straw and cocoanuts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8984:When he saw the door of a church hung in black, he entered: he sought
tests/les_miserables.txt:8985:out funerals as other men seek christenings. Widowhood and the grief of
tests/les_miserables.txt:8986:others attracted him, because of his great gentleness; he mingled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:8987:the friends clad in mourning, with families dressed in black, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:8988:priests groaning around a coffin. He seemed to like to give to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:8992:voices which sing on the verge of the obscure abyss of death.
tests/les_miserables.txt:8994:He performed a multitude of good actions, concealing his agency in them
tests/les_miserables.txt:8995:as a man conceals himself because of evil actions. He penetrated houses
tests/les_miserables.txt:8996:privately, at night; he ascended staircases furtively. A poor wretch on
tests/les_miserables.txt:8997:returning to his attic would find that his door had been opened,
tests/les_miserables.txt:8998:sometimes even forced, during his absence. The poor man made a clamor
tests/les_miserables.txt:8999:over it: some malefactor had been there! He entered, and the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:9000:thing he beheld was a piece of gold lying forgotten on some piece of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9001:furniture. The “malefactor” who had been there was Father Madeleine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9003:He was affable and sad. The people said: “There is a rich man who has
tests/les_miserables.txt:9004:not a haughty air. There is a happy man who has not a contented air.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9008:ever entered his chamber, which was a regular anchorite’s cell,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9009:furnished with winged hour-glasses and enlivened by cross-bones and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9010:skulls of dead men! This was much talked of, so that one of the elegant
tests/les_miserables.txt:9011:and malicious young women of M. sur M. came to him one day, and asked:
tests/les_miserables.txt:9012:“Monsieur le Maire, pray show us your chamber. It is said to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9013:grotto.” He smiled, and introduced them instantly into this “grotto.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9014:They were well punished for their curiosity. The room was very simply
tests/les_miserables.txt:9015:furnished in mahogany, which was rather ugly, like all furniture of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9016:that sort, and hung with paper worth twelve sous. They could see
tests/les_miserables.txt:9017:nothing remarkable about it, except two candlesticks of antique pattern
tests/les_miserables.txt:9018:which stood on the chimney-piece and appeared to be silver, “for they
tests/les_miserables.txt:9022:Nevertheless, people continued to say that no one ever got into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9023:room, and that it was a hermit’s cave, a mysterious retreat, a hole, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9027:Laffitte, with this peculiar feature, that they were always at his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9028:immediate disposal, so that, it was added, M. Madeleine could make his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9029:appearance at Laffitte’s any morning, sign a receipt, and carry off his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9031:millions” were reducible, as we have said, to six hundred and thirty or
tests/les_miserables.txt:9032:forty thousand francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9040:At the beginning of 1820 the newspapers announced the death of M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9042:the odor of sanctity at the age of eighty-two.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9044:The Bishop of D—— to supply here a detail which the papers omitted—had
tests/les_miserables.txt:9045:been blind for many years before his death, and content to be blind, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:9049:fact, one of the most strangely exquisite forms of happiness upon this
tests/les_miserables.txt:9050:earth, where nothing is complete. To have continually at one’s side a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9051:woman, a daughter, a sister, a charming being, who is there because you
tests/les_miserables.txt:9052:need her and because she cannot do without you; to know that we are
tests/les_miserables.txt:9053:indispensable to a person who is necessary to us; to be able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9054:incessantly measure one’s affection by the amount of her presence which
tests/les_miserables.txt:9055:she bestows on us, and to say to ourselves, “Since she consecrates the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9056:whole of her time to me, it is because I possess the whole of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:9057:heart”; to behold her thought in lieu of her face; to be able to verify
tests/les_miserables.txt:9058:the fidelity of one being amid the eclipse of the world; to regard the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9059:rustle of a gown as the sound of wings; to hear her come and go,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9060:retire, speak, return, sing, and to think that one is the centre of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9061:these steps, of this speech; to manifest at each instant one’s personal
tests/les_miserables.txt:9062:attraction; to feel one’s self all the more powerful because of one’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:9063:infirmity; to become in one’s obscurity, and through one’s obscurity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9064:the star around which this angel gravitates,—few felicities equal this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9065:The supreme happiness of life consists in the conviction that one is
tests/les_miserables.txt:9067:one’s self; this conviction the blind man possesses. To be served in
tests/les_miserables.txt:9068:distress is to be caressed. Does he lack anything? No. One does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:9070:constituted of virtue! There is no blindness where there is certainty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9073:touches your brow; it is her mouth: you hear a breath very near you; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:9076:immovable reed, to touch Providence with one’s hands, and to be able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9078:obscure, celestial flower, undergoes a mysterious blossoming. One would
tests/les_miserables.txt:9079:not exchange that shadow for all brightness! The angel soul is there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9082:approaching, and behold! she is there. One overflows with serenity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9083:with gayety, with ecstasy; one is a radiance amid the night. And there
tests/les_miserables.txt:9084:are a thousand little cares. Nothings, which are enormous in that void.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9085:The most ineffable accents of the feminine voice employed to lull you,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9086:and supplying the vanished universe to you. One is caressed with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9090:It was from this paradise that Monseigneur Welcome had passed to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9093:The announcement of his death was reprinted by the local journal of M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9094:sur M. On the following day, M. Madeleine appeared clad wholly in
tests/les_miserables.txt:9095:black, and with crape on his hat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9097:This mourning was noticed in the town, and commented on. It seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9098:throw a light on M. Madeleine’s origin. It was concluded that some
tests/les_miserables.txt:9101:raised M. Madeleine’s credit greatly, and procured for him, instantly
tests/les_miserables.txt:9102:and at one blow, a certain consideration in the noble world of M. sur
tests/les_miserables.txt:9103:M. The microscopic Faubourg Saint-Germain of the place meditated
tests/les_miserables.txt:9105:bishop. M. Madeleine perceived the advancement which he had obtained,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9106:by the more numerous courtesies of the old women and the more plentiful
tests/les_miserables.txt:9108:world, who was curious by right of seniority, ventured to ask him, “M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9109:le Maire is doubtless a cousin of the late Bishop of D——?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9118:He replied, “It is because I was a servant in his family in my youth.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9121:Another thing which was remarked, was, that every time that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:9122:encountered in the town a young Savoyard who was roaming about the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9123:country and seeking chimneys to sweep, the mayor had him summoned,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9124:inquired his name, and gave him money. The little Savoyards told each
tests/les_miserables.txt:9133:Little by little, and in the course of time, all this opposition
tests/les_miserables.txt:9134:subsided. There had at first been exercised against M. Madeleine, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:9135:virtue of a sort of law which all those who rise must submit to,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9136:blackening and calumnies; then they grew to be nothing more than
tests/les_miserables.txt:9137:ill-nature, then merely malicious remarks, then even this entirely
tests/les_miserables.txt:9138:disappeared; respect became complete, unanimous, cordial, and towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:9140:pronounced at M. sur M. with almost the same accent as “Monseigneur the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9141:Bishop” had been pronounced in D—— in 1815. People came from a distance
tests/les_miserables.txt:9142:of ten leagues around to consult M. Madeleine. He put an end to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9143:differences, he prevented lawsuits, he reconciled enemies. Every one
tests/les_miserables.txt:9145:had for a soul the book of the natural law. It was like an epidemic of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9146:veneration, which in the course of six or seven years gradually took
tests/les_miserables.txt:9147:possession of the whole district.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9149:One single man in the town, in the arrondissement, absolutely escaped
tests/les_miserables.txt:9150:this contagion, and, whatever Father Madeleine did, remained his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9151:opponent as though a sort of incorruptible and imperturbable instinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:9152:kept him on the alert and uneasy. It seems, in fact, as though there
tests/les_miserables.txt:9153:existed in certain men a veritable bestial instinct, though pure and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9154:upright, like all instincts, which creates antipathies and sympathies,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9155:which fatally separates one nature from another nature, which does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:9156:hesitate, which feels no disquiet, which does not hold its peace, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9157:which never belies itself, clear in its obscurity, infallible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9158:imperious, intractable, stubborn to all counsels of the intelligence
tests/les_miserables.txt:9159:and to all the dissolvents of reason, and which, in whatever manner
tests/les_miserables.txt:9160:destinies are arranged, secretly warns the man-dog of the presence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9161:the man-cat, and the man-fox of the presence of the man-lion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9164:street, calm, affectionate, surrounded by the blessings of all, a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:9165:of lofty stature, clad in an iron-gray frock-coat, armed with a heavy
tests/les_miserables.txt:9166:cane, and wearing a battered hat, turned round abruptly behind him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9168:slow shake of the head, and his upper lip raised in company with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9169:lower to his nose, a sort of significant grimace which might be
tests/les_miserables.txt:9170:translated by: “What is that man, after all? I certainly have seen him
tests/les_miserables.txt:9171:somewhere. In any case, I am not his dupe.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9174:This person, grave with a gravity which was almost menacing, was one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9176:spectator’s attention.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9178:His name was Javert, and he belonged to the police.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9180:At M. sur M. he exercised the unpleasant but useful functions of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:9181:inspector. He had not seen Madeleine’s beginnings. Javert owed the post
tests/les_miserables.txt:9182:which he occupied to the protection of M. Chabouillet, the secretary of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9183:the Minister of State, Comte Anglès, then prefect of police at Paris.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9184:When Javert arrived at M. sur M. the fortune of the great manufacturer
tests/les_miserables.txt:9185:was already made, and Father Madeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9187:Certain police officers have a peculiar physiognomy, which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:9188:complicated with an air of baseness mingled with an air of authority.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9191:It is our conviction that if souls were visible to the eyes, we should
tests/les_miserables.txt:9192:be able to see distinctly that strange thing that each one individual
tests/les_miserables.txt:9193:of the human race corresponds to some one of the species of the animal
tests/les_miserables.txt:9194:creation; and we could easily recognize this truth, hardly perceived by
tests/les_miserables.txt:9196:tiger, all animals exist in man, and that each one of them is in a man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9199:Animals are nothing else than the figures of our virtues and our vices,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9201:them to us in order to induce us to reflect. Only since animals are
tests/les_miserables.txt:9202:mere shadows, God has not made them capable of education in the full
tests/les_miserables.txt:9203:sense of the word; what is the use? On the contrary, our souls being
tests/les_miserables.txt:9204:realities and having a goal which is appropriate to them, God has
tests/les_miserables.txt:9205:bestowed on them intelligence; that is to say, the possibility of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9206:education. Social education, when well done, can always draw from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9207:soul, of whatever sort it may be, the utility which it contains.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9209:This, be it said, is of course from the restricted point of view of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9210:terrestrial life which is apparent, and without prejudging the profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:9211:question of the anterior or ulterior personality of the beings which
tests/les_miserables.txt:9216:there is one of the animal species of creation, it will be easy for us
tests/les_miserables.txt:9217:to say what there was in Police Officer Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9219:The peasants of Asturias are convinced that in every litter of wolves
tests/les_miserables.txt:9220:there is one dog, which is killed by the mother because, otherwise, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:9223:Give to this dog-son of a wolf a human face, and the result will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:9228:of society, and he despaired of ever re-entering it. He observed that
tests/les_miserables.txt:9229:society unpardoningly excludes two classes of men,—those who attack it
tests/les_miserables.txt:9230:and those who guard it; he had no choice except between these two
tests/les_miserables.txt:9231:classes; at the same time, he was conscious of an indescribable
tests/les_miserables.txt:9232:foundation of rigidity, regularity, and probity, complicated with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:9233:inexpressible hatred for the race of bohemians whence he was sprung. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:9234:entered the police; he succeeded there. At forty years of age he was an
tests/les_miserables.txt:9235:inspector.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9237:During his youth he had been employed in the convict establishments of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9240:Before proceeding further, let us come to an understanding as to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9241:words, “human face,” which we have just applied to Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9243:The human face of Javert consisted of a flat nose, with two deep
tests/les_miserables.txt:9244:nostrils, towards which enormous whiskers ascended on his cheeks. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:9245:felt ill at ease when he saw these two forests and these two caverns
tests/les_miserables.txt:9250:watchdog; when he laughed, he was a tiger. As for the rest, he had very
tests/les_miserables.txt:9251:little skull and a great deal of jaw; his hair concealed his forehead
tests/les_miserables.txt:9253:central frown, like an imprint of wrath; his gaze was obscure; his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9254:mouth pursed up and terrible; his air that of ferocious command.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9256:This man was composed of two very simple and two very good sentiments,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9257:comparatively; but he rendered them almost bad, by dint of exaggerating
tests/les_miserables.txt:9258:them,—respect for authority, hatred of rebellion; and in his eyes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9259:murder, robbery, all crimes, are only forms of rebellion. He enveloped
tests/les_miserables.txt:9260:in a blind and profound faith every one who had a function in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9261:state, from the prime minister to the rural policeman. He covered with
tests/les_miserables.txt:9262:scorn, aversion, and disgust every one who had once crossed the legal
tests/les_miserables.txt:9263:threshold of evil. He was absolute, and admitted no exceptions. On the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9264:one hand, he said, “The functionary can make no mistake; the magistrate
tests/les_miserables.txt:9266:irremediably lost. Nothing good can come from them.” He fully shared
tests/les_miserables.txt:9267:the opinion of those extreme minds which attribute to human law I know
tests/les_miserables.txt:9269:authenticating, demons, and who place a Styx at the base of society. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:9270:was stoical, serious, austere; a melancholy dreamer, humble and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9271:haughty, like fanatics. His glance was like a gimlet, cold and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9272:piercing. His whole life hung on these two words: watchfulness and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9273:supervision. He had introduced a straight line into what is the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:9274:crooked thing in the world; he possessed the conscience of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9275:usefulness, the religion of his functions, and he was a spy as other
tests/les_miserables.txt:9277:arrested his own father, if the latter had escaped from the galleys,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9278:and would have denounced his mother, if she had broken her ban. And he
tests/les_miserables.txt:9279:would have done it with that sort of inward satisfaction which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:9280:conferred by virtue. And, withal, a life of privation, isolation,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9281:abnegation, chastity, with never a diversion. It was implacable duty;
tests/les_miserables.txt:9282:the police understood, as the Spartans understood Sparta, a pitiless
tests/les_miserables.txt:9283:lying in wait, a ferocious honesty, a marble informer, Brutus in
tests/les_miserables.txt:9284:Vidocq.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9287:withdraws himself from observation. The mystical school of Joseph de
tests/les_miserables.txt:9288:Maistre, which at that epoch seasoned with lofty cosmogony those things
tests/les_miserables.txt:9289:which were called the ultra newspapers, would not have failed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9290:declare that Javert was a symbol. His brow was not visible; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:9291:disappeared beneath his hat: his eyes were not visible, since they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:9292:lost under his eyebrows: his chin was not visible, for it was plunged
tests/les_miserables.txt:9293:in his cravat: his hands were not visible; they were drawn up in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9294:sleeves: and his cane was not visible; he carried it under his coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9295:But when the occasion presented itself, there was suddenly seen to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9296:emerge from all this shadow, as from an ambuscade, a narrow and angular
tests/les_miserables.txt:9297:forehead, a baleful glance, a threatening chin, enormous hands, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9298:monstrous cudgel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9300:In his leisure moments, which were far from frequent, he read, although
tests/les_miserables.txt:9301:he hated books; this caused him to be not wholly illiterate. This could
tests/les_miserables.txt:9302:be recognized by some emphasis in his speech.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9304:As we have said, he had no vices. When he was pleased with himself, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:9305:permitted himself a pinch of snuff. Therein lay his connection with
tests/les_miserables.txt:9308:The reader will have no difficulty in understanding that Javert was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9309:terror of that whole class which the annual statistics of the Ministry
tests/les_miserables.txt:9310:of Justice designates under the rubric, Vagrants. The name of Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:9311:routed them by its mere utterance; the face of Javert petrified them at
tests/les_miserables.txt:9314:Such was this formidable man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9316:Javert was like an eye constantly fixed on M. Madeleine. An eye full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9317:suspicion and conjecture. M. Madeleine had finally perceived the fact;
tests/les_miserables.txt:9318:but it seemed to be of no importance to him. He did not even put a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9320:embarrassing and almost oppressive gaze without appearing to notice it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9321:He treated Javert with ease and courtesy, as he did all the rest of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9324:It was divined, from some words which escaped Javert, that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:9325:secretly investigated, with that curiosity which belongs to the race,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9326:and into which there enters as much instinct as will, all the anterior
tests/les_miserables.txt:9327:traces which Father Madeleine might have left elsewhere. He seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9328:know, and he sometimes said in covert words, that some one had gleaned
tests/les_miserables.txt:9329:certain information in a certain district about a family which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:9330:disappeared. Once he chanced to say, as he was talking to himself, “I
tests/les_miserables.txt:9332:not a word. It seemed that the thread which he thought he held had
tests/les_miserables.txt:9335:Moreover, and this furnishes the necessary corrective for the too
tests/les_miserables.txt:9336:absolute sense which certain words might present, there can be nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:9337:really infallible in a human creature, and the peculiarity of instinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:9338:is that it can become confused, thrown off the track, and defeated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9339:Otherwise, it would be superior to intelligence, and the beast would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:9342:Javert was evidently somewhat disconcerted by the perfect naturalness
tests/les_miserables.txt:9345:One day, nevertheless, his strange manner appeared to produce an
tests/les_miserables.txt:9346:impression on M. Madeleine. It was on the following occasion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9355:M.; he heard a noise, and saw a group some distance away. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:9356:approached. An old man named Father Fauchelevent had just fallen
tests/les_miserables.txt:9357:beneath his cart, his horse having tumbled down.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9359:This Fauchelevent was one of the few enemies whom M. Madeleine had at
tests/les_miserables.txt:9360:that time. When Madeleine arrived in the neighborhood, Fauchelevent, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:9361:ex-notary and a peasant who was almost educated, had a business which
tests/les_miserables.txt:9362:was beginning to be in a bad way. Fauchelevent had seen this simple
tests/les_miserables.txt:9363:workman grow rich, while he, a lawyer, was being ruined. This had
tests/les_miserables.txt:9364:filled him with jealousy, and he had done all he could, on every
tests/les_miserables.txt:9365:occasion, to injure Madeleine. Then bankruptcy had come; and as the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:9366:man had nothing left but a cart and a horse, and neither family nor
tests/les_miserables.txt:9367:children, he had turned carter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9369:The horse had two broken legs and could not rise. The old man was
tests/les_miserables.txt:9370:caught in the wheels. The fall had been so unlucky that the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:9371:weight of the vehicle rested on his breast. The cart was quite heavily
tests/les_miserables.txt:9372:laden. Father Fauchelevent was rattling in the throat in the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:9374:unmethodical effort, aid awkwardly given, a wrong shake, might kill
tests/les_miserables.txt:9376:vehicle off of him. Javert, who had come up at the moment of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9377:accident, had sent for a jack-screw.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9379:M. Madeleine arrived. People stood aside respectfully.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9381:“Help!” cried old Fauchelevent. “Who will be good and save the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:9387:“Is there a jack-screw to be had?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9395:“They have gone for the nearest, to Flachot’s place, where there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9396:farrier; but it makes no difference; it will take a good quarter of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:9400:“A quarter of an hour!” exclaimed Madeleine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9402:It had rained on the preceding night; the soil was soaked.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9404:The cart was sinking deeper into the earth every moment, and crushing
tests/les_miserables.txt:9405:the old carter’s breast more and more. It was evident that his ribs
tests/les_miserables.txt:9414:“But it will be too late then! Don’t you see that the cart is sinking?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9420:“Listen,” resumed Madeleine; “there is still room enough under the cart
tests/les_miserables.txt:9421:to allow a man to crawl beneath it and raise it with his back. Only
tests/les_miserables.txt:9422:half a minute, and the poor man can be taken out. Is there any one here
tests/les_miserables.txt:9432:crushed!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9438:The same silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9440:“It is not the will which is lacking,” said a voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9442:M. Madeleine turned round, and recognized Javert. He had not noticed
tests/les_miserables.txt:9447:“It is strength. One would have to be a terrible man to do such a thing
tests/les_miserables.txt:9448:as lift a cart like that on his back.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9454:“Monsieur Madeleine, I have never known but one man capable of doing
tests/les_miserables.txt:9460:Javert added, with an air of indifference, but without removing his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9463:“He was a convict.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9473:Meanwhile, the cart continued to sink slowly. Father Fauchelevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:9476:“I am strangling! My ribs are breaking! a screw! something! Ah!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9479:Madeleine glanced about him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9487:“I have never known but one man who could take the place of a screw,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9488:and he was that convict.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9491:“Ah! It is crushing me!” cried the old man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9493:Madeleine raised his head, met Javert’s falcon eye still fixed upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:9495:saying a word, he fell on his knees, and before the crowd had even had
tests/les_miserables.txt:9496:time to utter a cry, he was underneath the vehicle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9498:A terrible moment of expectation and silence ensued.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9500:They beheld Madeleine, almost flat on his stomach beneath that terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:9502:together. They shouted to him, “Father Madeleine, come out!” Old
tests/les_miserables.txt:9503:Fauchelevent himself said to him, “Monsieur Madeleine, go away! You see
tests/les_miserables.txt:9504:that I am fated to die! Leave me! You will get yourself crushed also!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9507:All the spectators were panting. The wheels had continued to sink, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9508:it had become almost impossible for Madeleine to make his way from
tests/les_miserables.txt:9509:under the vehicle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9511:Suddenly the enormous mass was seen to quiver, the cart rose slowly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9512:the wheels half emerged from the ruts. They heard a stifled voice
tests/les_miserables.txt:9513:crying, “Make haste! Help!” It was Madeleine, who had just made a final
tests/les_miserables.txt:9516:They rushed forwards. The devotion of a single man had given force and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9517:courage to all. The cart was raised by twenty arms. Old Fauchelevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:9521:clothes were torn and covered with mud. All wept. The old man kissed
tests/les_miserables.txt:9522:his knees and called him the good God. As for him, he bore upon his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9523:countenance an indescribable expression of happy and celestial
tests/les_miserables.txt:9533:Fauchelevent had dislocated his kneepan in his fall. Father Madeleine
tests/les_miserables.txt:9534:had him conveyed to an infirmary which he had established for his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9535:workmen in the factory building itself, and which was served by two
tests/les_miserables.txt:9536:sisters of charity. On the following morning the old man found a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9537:thousand-franc bank-note on his night-stand, with these words in Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:9538:Madeleine’s writing: _“I purchase your horse and cart.”_ The cart was
tests/les_miserables.txt:9539:broken, and the horse was dead. Fauchelevent recovered, but his knee
tests/les_miserables.txt:9540:remained stiff. M. Madeleine, on the recommendation of the sisters of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9541:charity and of his priest, got the good man a place as gardener in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9542:female convent in the Rue Saint-Antoine in Paris.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9545:that Javert beheld M. Madeleine clothed in the scarf which gave him
tests/les_miserables.txt:9546:authority over the town, he felt the sort of shudder which a watch-dog
tests/les_miserables.txt:9547:might experience on smelling a wolf in his master’s clothes. From that
tests/les_miserables.txt:9548:time forth he avoided him as much as he possibly could. When the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9549:requirements of the service imperatively demanded it, and he could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:9551:respect.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9553:This prosperity created at M. sur M. by Father Madeleine had, besides
tests/les_miserables.txt:9554:the visible signs which we have mentioned, another symptom which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:9555:nonetheless significant for not being visible. This never deceives.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9556:When the population suffers, when work is lacking, when there is no
tests/les_miserables.txt:9557:commerce, the tax-payer resists imposts through penury, he exhausts and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9559:the charges for compelling and collection. When work is abundant, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:9560:the country is rich and happy, the taxes are paid easily and cost the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9562:of the public misery and riches,—the cost of collecting the taxes. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:9563:the course of seven years the expense of collecting the taxes had
tests/les_miserables.txt:9565:led to this arrondissement being frequently cited from all the rest by
tests/les_miserables.txt:9566:M. de Villèle, then Minister of Finance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9568:Such was the condition of the country when Fantine returned thither. No
tests/les_miserables.txt:9569:one remembered her. Fortunately, the door of M. Madeleine’s factory was
tests/les_miserables.txt:9570:like the face of a friend. She presented herself there, and was
tests/les_miserables.txt:9572:Fantine; she could not be very skilful at it, and she therefore earned
tests/les_miserables.txt:9573:but little by her day’s work; but it was sufficient; the problem was
tests/les_miserables.txt:9583:moment. To live honestly by her own labor, what mercy from heaven! The
tests/les_miserables.txt:9588:furnished on credit on the strength of her future work—a lingering
tests/les_miserables.txt:9589:trace of her improvident ways. As she was not able to say that she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:9590:married she took good care, as we have seen, not to mention her little
tests/les_miserables.txt:9595:public letter-writer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9597:She wrote often, and this was noticed. It began to be said in an
tests/les_miserables.txt:9602:There is no one for spying on people’s actions like those who are not
tests/les_miserables.txt:9603:concerned in them. Why does that gentleman never come except at
tests/les_miserables.txt:9606:always descend from her hackney-coach before reaching her house? Why
tests/les_miserables.txt:9607:does she send out to purchase six sheets of note paper, when she has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9608:“whole stationer’s shop full of it?” etc. There exist beings who, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:9609:the sake of obtaining the key to these enigmas, which are, moreover, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9610:no consequence whatever to them, spend more money, waste more time,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9611:take more trouble, than would be required for ten good actions, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9612:that gratuitously, for their own pleasure, without receiving any other
tests/les_miserables.txt:9613:payment for their curiosity than curiosity. They will follow up such
tests/les_miserables.txt:9614:and such a man or woman for whole days; they will do sentry duty for
tests/les_miserables.txt:9615:hours at a time on the corners of the streets, under alley-way doors at
tests/les_miserables.txt:9616:night, in cold and rain; they will bribe errand-porters, they will make
tests/les_miserables.txt:9617:the drivers of hackney-coaches and lackeys tipsy, buy a waiting-maid,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9619:knowing, and penetrating into things. A pure itch for talking. And
tests/les_miserables.txt:9620:often these secrets once known, these mysteries made public, these
tests/les_miserables.txt:9621:enigmas illuminated by the light of day, bring on catastrophies, duels,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9624:matter, and by pure instinct. A sad thing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9626:Certain persons are malicious solely through a necessity for talking.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9627:Their conversation, the chat of the drawing-room, gossip of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9628:anteroom, is like those chimneys which consume wood rapidly; they need
tests/les_miserables.txt:9629:a great amount of combustibles; and their combustibles are furnished by
tests/les_miserables.txt:9632:So Fantine was watched.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9639:was thinking of her child; perhaps, also, of the man whom she had
tests/les_miserables.txt:9644:It was observed that she wrote twice a month at least, and that she
tests/les_miserables.txt:9645:paid the carriage on the letter. They managed to obtain the address:
tests/les_miserables.txt:9646:_Monsieur, Monsieur Thénardier, inn-keeper at Montfermeil_. The public
tests/les_miserables.txt:9647:writer, a good old man who could not fill his stomach with red wine
tests/les_miserables.txt:9648:without emptying his pocket of secrets, was made to talk in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9649:wine-shop. In short, it was discovered that Fantine had a child. “She
tests/les_miserables.txt:9652:return: “For my five and thirty francs I have freed my mind. I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:9653:seen the child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9656:The gossip who did this thing was a gorgon named Madame Victurnien, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9657:guardian and door-keeper of every one’s virtue. Madame Victurnien was
tests/les_miserables.txt:9658:fifty-six, and re-enforced the mask of ugliness with the mask of age. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:9659:quavering voice, a whimsical mind. This old dame had once been
tests/les_miserables.txt:9660:young—astonishing fact! In her youth, in ’93, she had married a monk
tests/les_miserables.txt:9661:who had fled from his cloister in a red cap, and passed from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9662:Bernardines to the Jacobins. She was dry, rough, peevish, sharp,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9663:captious, almost venomous; all this in memory of her monk, whose widow
tests/les_miserables.txt:9665:will. She was a nettle in which the rustle of the cassock was visible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9666:At the Restoration she had turned bigot, and that with so much energy
tests/les_miserables.txt:9668:which she bequeathed with much ostentation to a religious community.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9669:She was in high favor at the episcopal palace of Arras. So this Madame
tests/les_miserables.txt:9670:Victurnien went to Montfermeil, and returned with the remark, “I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:9671:seen the child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9674:All this took time. Fantine had been at the factory for more than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9676:fifty francs from the mayor, told her that she was no longer employed
tests/les_miserables.txt:9681:twelve francs instead of six, had just exacted fifteen francs instead
tests/les_miserables.txt:9684:Fantine was overwhelmed. She could not leave the neighborhood; she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:9685:in debt for her rent and furniture. Fifty francs was not sufficient to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9686:cancel this debt. She stammered a few supplicating words. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:9688:Fantine was only a moderately good workwoman. Overcome with shame, even
tests/les_miserables.txt:9693:the mayor; she did not dare. The mayor had given her fifty francs
tests/les_miserables.txt:9694:because he was good, and had dismissed her because he was just. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:9695:bowed before the decision.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9706:such combinations of events. M. Madeleine was in the habit of almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:9709:At the head of this room he had placed an elderly spinster, whom the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9710:priest had provided for him, and he had full confidence in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:9711:superintendent,—a truly respectable person, firm, equitable, upright,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9712:full of the charity which consists in giving, but not having in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9713:same degree that charity which consists in understanding and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:9716:the conviction that she was doing right, that the superintendent had
tests/les_miserables.txt:9717:instituted the suit, judged, condemned, and executed Fantine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9719:As regards the fifty francs, she had given them from a fund which M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9720:Madeleine had intrusted to her for charitable purposes, and for giving
tests/les_miserables.txt:9721:assistance to the workwomen, and of which she rendered no account.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9724:she went from house to house. No one would have her. She could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:9725:leave town. The second-hand dealer, to whom she was in debt for her
tests/les_miserables.txt:9728:said to her, “You are young and pretty; you can pay.” She divided the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9729:fifty francs between the landlord and the furniture-dealer, returned to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9730:the latter three-quarters of his goods, kept only necessaries, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9732:and still about fifty francs in debt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9734:She began to make coarse shirts for soldiers of the garrison, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9735:earned twelve sous a day. Her daughter cost her ten. It was at this
tests/les_miserables.txt:9738:However, the old woman who lighted her candle for her when she returned
tests/les_miserables.txt:9739:at night, taught her the art of living in misery. Back of living on
tests/les_miserables.txt:9740:little, there is the living on nothing. These are the two chambers; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9741:first is dark, the second is black.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9744:give up a bird which eats a half a farthing’s worth of millet every two
tests/les_miserables.txt:9745:days; how to make a coverlet of one’s petticoat, and a petticoat of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9746:one’s coverlet; how to save one’s candle, by taking one’s meals by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9747:light of the opposite window. No one knows all that certain feeble
tests/les_miserables.txt:9748:creatures, who have grown old in privation and honesty, can get out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9749:a sou. It ends by being a talent. Fantine acquired this sublime talent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9750:and regained a little courage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9752:At this epoch she said to a neighbor, “Bah! I say to myself, by only
tests/les_miserables.txt:9760:in this distress. She thought of having her come. But what then! Make
tests/les_miserables.txt:9762:Thénardiers! How could she pay them? And the journey! How pay for that?
tests/les_miserables.txt:9764:The old woman who had given her lessons in what may be called the life
tests/les_miserables.txt:9765:of indigence, was a sainted spinster named Marguerite, who was pious
tests/les_miserables.txt:9766:with a true piety, poor and charitable towards the poor, and even
tests/les_miserables.txt:9767:towards the rich, knowing how to write just sufficiently to sign
tests/les_miserables.txt:9768:herself Marguerite, and believing in God, which is science.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9770:There are many such virtuous people in this lower world; some day they
tests/les_miserables.txt:9777:her; the cold and bitter scorn of the passers-by penetrated her very
tests/les_miserables.txt:9781:sarcasm and the curiosity of all in small towns. In Paris, at least, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:9782:one knows you, and this obscurity is a garment. Oh! how she would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:9785:She was obliged to accustom herself to disrepute, as she had accustomed
tests/les_miserables.txt:9786:herself to indigence. Gradually she decided on her course. At the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9791:She went and came, bearing her head well up, with a bitter smile, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9792:was conscious that she was becoming brazen-faced.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9794:Madame Victurnien sometimes saw her passing, from her window, noticed
tests/les_miserables.txt:9795:the distress of “that creature” who, “thanks to her,” had been “put
tests/les_miserables.txt:9796:back in her proper place,” and congratulated herself. The happiness of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9797:the evil-minded is black.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9799:Excess of toil wore out Fantine, and the little dry cough which
tests/les_miserables.txt:9800:troubled her increased. She sometimes said to her neighbor, Marguerite,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9804:Nevertheless, when she combed her beautiful hair in the morning with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:9805:old broken comb, and it flowed about her like floss silk, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:9806:experienced a moment of happy coquetry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9815:passed, but winter came again. Short days, less work. Winter: no
tests/les_miserables.txt:9817:fogs, twilight; the window is gray; it is impossible to see clearly at
tests/les_miserables.txt:9818:it. The sky is but a vent-hole. The whole day is a cavern. The sun has
tests/les_miserables.txt:9819:the air of a beggar. A frightful season! Winter changes the water of
tests/les_miserables.txt:9820:heaven and the heart of man into a stone. Her creditors harrassed her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9822:Fantine earned too little. Her debts had increased. The Thénardiers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9823:who were not promptly paid, wrote to her constantly letters whose
tests/les_miserables.txt:9824:contents drove her to despair, and whose carriage ruined her. One day
tests/les_miserables.txt:9826:cold weather, that she needed a woollen skirt, and that her mother must
tests/les_miserables.txt:9827:send at least ten francs for this. She received the letter, and crushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:9829:shop at the corner of the street, and pulled out her comb. Her
tests/les_miserables.txt:9832:“What splendid hair!” exclaimed the barber.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9834:“How much will you give me for it?” said she.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9836:“Ten francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9842:She purchased a knitted petticoat and sent it to the Thénardiers. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:9843:petticoat made the Thénardiers furious. It was the money that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:9844:wanted. They gave the petticoat to Éponine. The poor Lark continued to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9847:Fantine thought: “My child is no longer cold. I have clothed her with
tests/les_miserables.txt:9848:my hair.” She put on little round caps which concealed her shorn head,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9849:and in which she was still pretty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9853:When she saw that she could no longer dress her hair, she began to hate
tests/les_miserables.txt:9856:who had discharged her, that he was the cause of her unhappiness, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:9857:came to hate him also, and most of all. When she passed the factory in
tests/les_miserables.txt:9858:working hours, when the workpeople were at the door, she affected to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9861:An old workwoman who once saw her laughing and singing in this fashion
tests/les_miserables.txt:9862:said, “There’s a girl who will come to a bad end.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9866:out of bravado and with rage in her heart. He was a miserable scamp, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9867:sort of mendicant musician, a lazy beggar, who beat her, and who
tests/les_miserables.txt:9870:She adored her child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9872:The lower she descended, the darker everything grew about her, the more
tests/les_miserables.txt:9874:“When I get rich, I will have my Cosette with me;” and she laughed. Her
tests/les_miserables.txt:9875:cough did not leave her, and she had sweats on her back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9877:One day she received from the Thénardiers a letter couched in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9878:following terms: “Cosette is ill with a malady which is going the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9879:rounds of the neighborhood. A miliary fever, they call it. Expensive
tests/les_miserables.txt:9880:drugs are required. This is ruining us, and we can no longer pay for
tests/les_miserables.txt:9881:them. If you do not send us forty francs before the week is out, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9886:good! Forty francs! the idea! That makes two napoleons! Where do they
tests/les_miserables.txt:9890:Nevertheless she went to a dormer window in the staircase and read the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9891:letter once more. Then she descended the stairs and emerged, running
tests/les_miserables.txt:9897:She replied: “A fine piece of stupidity that some country people have
tests/les_miserables.txt:9898:written to me. They demand forty francs of me. So much for you, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:9902:As she crossed the square, she saw a great many people collected around
tests/les_miserables.txt:9903:a carriage of eccentric shape, upon the top of which stood a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:9904:dressed in red, who was holding forth. He was a quack dentist on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:9905:rounds, who was offering to the public full sets of teeth, opiates,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9909:harangue, which contained slang for the populace and jargon for
tests/les_miserables.txt:9910:respectable people. The tooth-puller espied the lovely, laughing girl,
tests/les_miserables.txt:9911:and suddenly exclaimed: “You have beautiful teeth, you girl there, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:9913:gold napoleon apiece for them.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9922:“How horrible!” exclaimed Fantine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9925:“Here’s a lucky girl!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9929:voice of the man shouting to her: “Reflect, my beauty! two napoleons;
tests/les_miserables.txt:9930:they may prove of service. If your heart bids you, come this evening to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9931:the inn of the _Tillac d’Argent_; you will find me there.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9934:Fantine returned home. She was furious, and related the occurrence to
tests/les_miserables.txt:9935:her good neighbor Marguerite: “Can you understand such a thing? Is he
tests/les_miserables.txt:9936:not an abominable man? How can they allow such people to go about the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9937:country! Pull out my two front teeth! Why, I should be horrible! My
tests/les_miserables.txt:9940:story! He told me that he should be at the _Tillac d’Argent_ this
tests/les_miserables.txt:9949:“That makes forty francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9952:“Yes,” said Fantine; “that makes forty francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9957:Thénardiers’ letter once more on the staircase.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9979:“Then it attacks children?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9982:“Children in particular.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:9990:Fantine left the room and went to read her letter once more on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:9991:staircase.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9994:direction of the Rue de Paris, where the inns are situated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:9998:one candle for the two,—she found Fantine seated on her bed, pale and
tests/les_miserables.txt:9999:frozen. She had not lain down. Her cap had fallen on her knees. Her
tests/les_miserables.txt:10000:candle had burned all night, and was almost entirely consumed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10002:wastefulness, and exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10004:“Lord! the candle is all burned out! Something has happened.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10010:Fantine had grown ten years older since the preceding night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10015:“Nothing,” replied Fantine. “Quite the contrary. My child will not die
tests/les_miserables.txt:10016:of that frightful malady, for lack of succor. I am content.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10019:So saying, she pointed out to the spinster two napoleons which were
tests/les_miserables.txt:10022:“Ah! Jesus God!” cried Marguerite. “Why, it is a fortune! Where did you
tests/les_miserables.txt:10028:At the same time she smiled. The candle illuminated her countenance. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:10029:was a bloody smile. A reddish saliva soiled the corners of her lips,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10030:and she had a black hole in her mouth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10032:The two teeth had been extracted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10034:She sent the forty francs to Montfermeil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10039:Fantine threw her mirror out of the window. She had long since quitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:10040:her cell on the second floor for an attic with only a latch to fasten
tests/les_miserables.txt:10041:it, next the roof; one of those attics whose extremity forms an angle
tests/les_miserables.txt:10042:with the floor, and knocks you on the head every instant. The poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:10043:occupant can reach the end of his chamber as he can the end of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:10046:She had no longer a bed; a rag which she called her coverlet, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10047:mattress on the floor, and a seatless chair still remained. A little
tests/les_miserables.txt:10048:rosebush which she had, had dried up, forgotten, in one corner. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10049:other corner was a butter-pot to hold water, which froze in winter, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10050:in which the various levels of the water remained long marked by these
tests/les_miserables.txt:10051:circles of ice. She had lost her shame; she lost her coquetry. A final
tests/les_miserables.txt:10052:sign. She went out, with dirty caps. Whether from lack of time or from
tests/les_miserables.txt:10053:indifference, she no longer mended her linen. As the heels wore out,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10054:she dragged her stockings down into her shoes. This was evident from
tests/les_miserables.txt:10055:the perpendicular wrinkles. She patched her bodice, which was old and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10056:worn out, with scraps of calico which tore at the slightest movement.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10057:The people to whom she was indebted made “scenes” and gave her no
tests/les_miserables.txt:10058:peace. She found them in the street, she found them again on her
tests/les_miserables.txt:10059:staircase. She passed many a night weeping and thinking. Her eyes were
tests/les_miserables.txt:10061:of the left shoulder-blade. She coughed a great deal. She deeply hated
tests/les_miserables.txt:10062:Father Madeleine, but made no complaint. She sewed seventeen hours a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10063:day; but a contractor for the work of prisons, who made the prisoners
tests/les_miserables.txt:10064:work at a discount, suddenly made prices fall, which reduced the daily
tests/les_miserables.txt:10066:nine sous a day! Her creditors were more pitiless than ever. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:10067:second-hand dealer, who had taken back nearly all his furniture, said
tests/les_miserables.txt:10068:to her incessantly, “When will you pay me, you hussy?” What did they
tests/les_miserables.txt:10071:Thénardier wrote to her that he had waited with decidedly too much
tests/les_miserables.txt:10072:amiability and that he must have a hundred francs at once; otherwise he
tests/les_miserables.txt:10073:would turn little Cosette out of doors, convalescent as she was from
tests/les_miserables.txt:10074:her heavy illness, into the cold and the streets, and that she might do
tests/les_miserables.txt:10075:what she liked with herself, and die if she chose. “A hundred francs,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10076:thought Fantine. “But in what trade can one earn a hundred sous a day?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10082:The unfortunate girl became a woman of the town.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10090:What is this history of Fantine? It is society purchasing a slave.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10094:From hunger, cold, isolation, destitution. A dolorous bargain. A soul
tests/les_miserables.txt:10095:for a morsel of bread. Misery offers; society accepts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10097:The sacred law of Jesus Christ governs our civilization, but it does
tests/les_miserables.txt:10099:European civilization. This is a mistake. It still exists; but it
tests/les_miserables.txt:10100:weighs only upon the woman, and it is called prostitution.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10102:It weighs upon the woman, that is to say, upon grace, weakness, beauty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10103:maternity. This is not one of the least of man’s disgraces.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10105:At the point in this melancholy drama which we have now reached,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10106:nothing is left to Fantine of that which she had formerly been.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10108:She has become marble in becoming mire. Whoever touches her feels cold.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10110:dishonored figure. Life and the social order have said their last word
tests/les_miserables.txt:10112:everything, borne everything, experienced everything, suffered
tests/les_miserables.txt:10114:that resignation which resembles indifference, as death resembles
tests/les_miserables.txt:10115:sleep. She no longer avoids anything. Let all the clouds fall upon her,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10116:and all the ocean sweep over her! What matters it to her? She is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10120:fate can be exhausted, and that one has reached the bottom of anything
tests/les_miserables.txt:10136:There is in all small towns, and there was at M. sur M. in particular,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10137:a class of young men who nibble away an income of fifteen hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:10138:francs with the same air with which their prototypes devour two hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:10139:thousand francs a year in Paris. These are beings of the great neuter
tests/les_miserables.txt:10140:species: impotent men, parasites, cyphers, who have a little land, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10141:little folly, a little wit; who would be rustics in a drawing-room, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10143:my peasants, my woods”; who hiss actresses at the theatre to prove that
tests/les_miserables.txt:10144:they are persons of taste; quarrel with the officers of the garrison to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10146:tobacco, play billiards, stare at travellers as they descend from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10147:diligence, live at the café, dine at the inn, have a dog which eats the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10149:who stick at a sou, exaggerate the fashions, admire tragedy, despise
tests/les_miserables.txt:10150:women, wear out their old boots, copy London through Paris, and Paris
tests/les_miserables.txt:10154:M. Félix Tholomyès, had he remained in his own province and never
tests/les_miserables.txt:10157:If they were richer, one would say, “They are dandies;” if they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:10162:At that period a dandy was composed of a tall collar, a big cravat, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10163:watch with trinkets, three vests of different colors, worn one on top
tests/les_miserables.txt:10164:of the other—the red and blue inside; of a short-waisted olive coat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10165:with a codfish tail, a double row of silver buttons set close to each
tests/les_miserables.txt:10169:which was never exceeded. Add to this, high shoes with little irons on
tests/les_miserables.txt:10171:enormous cane, and conversation set off by puns of Potier. Over all,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10172:spurs and a moustache. At that epoch moustaches indicated the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10175:The provincial dandy wore the longest of spurs and the fiercest of
tests/les_miserables.txt:10176:moustaches.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10178:It was the period of the conflict of the republics of South America
tests/les_miserables.txt:10180:were royalist, and were called _morillos_; liberals wore hats with wide
tests/les_miserables.txt:10181:brims, which were called _bolivars_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10183:Eight or ten months, then, after that which is related in the preceding
tests/les_miserables.txt:10187:cloaks which completed the fashionable costume in cold weather, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:10188:amusing himself by tormenting a creature who was prowling about in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10189:ball-dress, with neck uncovered and flowers in her hair, in front of
tests/les_miserables.txt:10190:the officers’ café. This dandy was smoking, for he was decidedly
tests/les_miserables.txt:10193:Each time that the woman passed in front of him, he bestowed on her,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10194:together with a puff from his cigar, some apostrophe which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:10195:considered witty and mirthful, such as, “How ugly you are!—Will you get
tests/les_miserables.txt:10196:out of my sight?—You have no teeth!” etc., etc. This gentleman was
tests/les_miserables.txt:10197:known as M. Bamatabois. The woman, a melancholy, decorated spectre
tests/les_miserables.txt:10198:which went and came through the snow, made him no reply, did not even
tests/les_miserables.txt:10199:glance at him, and nevertheless continued her promenade in silence, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10200:with a sombre regularity, which brought her every five minutes within
tests/les_miserables.txt:10201:reach of this sarcasm, like the condemned soldier who returns under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10202:rods. The small effect which he produced no doubt piqued the lounger;
tests/les_miserables.txt:10203:and taking advantage of a moment when her back was turned, he crept up
tests/les_miserables.txt:10205:picked up a handful of snow from the pavement, and thrust it abruptly
tests/les_miserables.txt:10206:into her back, between her bare shoulders. The woman uttered a roar,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10208:man, burying her nails in his face, with the most frightful words which
tests/les_miserables.txt:10209:could fall from the guard-room into the gutter. These insults, poured
tests/les_miserables.txt:10210:forth in a voice roughened by brandy, did, indeed, proceed in hideous
tests/les_miserables.txt:10211:wise from a mouth which lacked its two front teeth. It was Fantine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10213:At the noise thus produced, the officers ran out in throngs from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10214:café, passers-by collected, and a large and merry circle, hooting and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10215:applauding, was formed around this whirlwind composed of two beings,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10216:whom there was some difficulty in recognizing as a man and a woman: the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10221:Suddenly a man of lofty stature emerged vivaciously from the crowd,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10222:seized the woman by her satin bodice, which was covered with mud, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10226:The woman raised her head; her furious voice suddenly died away. Her
tests/les_miserables.txt:10228:with a quiver of terror. She had recognized Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10230:The dandy took advantage of the incident to make his escape.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10239:Javert thrust aside the spectators, broke the circle, and set out with
tests/les_miserables.txt:10240:long strides towards the police station, which is situated at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10241:extremity of the square, dragging the wretched woman after him. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:10242:yielded mechanically. Neither he nor she uttered a word. The cloud of
tests/les_miserables.txt:10243:spectators followed, jesting, in a paroxysm of delight. Supreme misery
tests/les_miserables.txt:10244:an occasion for obscenity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10246:On arriving at the police station, which was a low room, warmed by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10248:by a detachment, Javert opened the door, entered with Fantine, and shut
tests/les_miserables.txt:10249:the door behind him, to the great disappointment of the curious, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:10250:raised themselves on tiptoe, and craned their necks in front of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10251:thick glass of the station-house, in their effort to see. Curiosity is
tests/les_miserables.txt:10254:On entering, Fantine fell down in a corner, motionless and mute,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10255:crouching down like a terrified dog.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10257:The sergeant of the guard brought a lighted candle to the table. Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:10258:seated himself, drew a sheet of stamped paper from his pocket, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10261:This class of women is consigned by our laws entirely to the discretion
tests/les_miserables.txt:10262:of the police. The latter do what they please, punish them, as seems
tests/les_miserables.txt:10263:good to them, and confiscate at their will those two sorry things which
tests/les_miserables.txt:10265:his grave face betrayed no emotion whatever. Nevertheless, he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:10266:seriously and deeply preoccupied. It was one of those moments when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:10267:was exercising without control, but subject to all the scruples of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10268:severe conscience, his redoubtable discretionary power. At that moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:10269:he was conscious that his police agent’s stool was a tribunal. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:10270:entering judgment. He judged and condemned. He summoned all the ideas
tests/les_miserables.txt:10271:which could possibly exist in his mind, around the great thing which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:10273:shocked he felt. It was evident that he had just witnessed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10274:commission of a crime. He had just beheld, yonder, in the street,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10275:society, in the person of a freeholder and an elector, insulted and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10276:attacked by a creature who was outside all pales. A prostitute had made
tests/les_miserables.txt:10277:an attempt on the life of a citizen. He had seen that, he, Javert. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:10278:wrote in silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10282:conduct this creature to jail.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10288:“Six months! six months of prison!” she exclaimed. “Six months in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:10289:to earn seven sous a day! But what will become of Cosette? My daughter!
tests/les_miserables.txt:10290:my daughter! But I still owe the Thénardiers over a hundred francs; do
tests/les_miserables.txt:10291:you know that, Monsieur Inspector?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10294:She dragged herself across the damp floor, among the muddy boots of all
tests/les_miserables.txt:10295:those men, without rising, with clasped hands, and taking great strides
tests/les_miserables.txt:10298:“Monsieur Javert,” said she, “I beseech your mercy. I assure you that I
tests/les_miserables.txt:10301:gentleman, the bourgeois, whom I do not know, put snow in my back. Has
tests/les_miserables.txt:10302:any one the right to put snow down our backs when we are walking along
tests/les_miserables.txt:10303:peaceably, and doing no harm to any one? I am rather ill, as you see.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10308:moment that he put the snow down my back. Monsieur Javert, good
tests/les_miserables.txt:10309:Monsieur Inspector! is there not some person here who saw it and can
tests/les_miserables.txt:10312:gives way to vivacity; and then, when some one puts something cold down
tests/les_miserables.txt:10313:your back just when you are not expecting it! I did wrong to spoil that
tests/les_miserables.txt:10315:God! It makes no difference to me whether I ask his pardon. Do me the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10316:favor to-day, for this once, Monsieur Javert. Hold! you do not know
tests/les_miserables.txt:10317:that in prison one can earn only seven sous a day; it is not the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10318:government’s fault, but seven sous is one’s earnings; and just fancy, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:10319:must pay one hundred francs, or my little girl will be sent to me. Oh,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10320:my God! I cannot have her with me. What I do is so vile! Oh, my
tests/les_miserables.txt:10321:Cosette! Oh, my little angel of the Holy Virgin! what will become of
tests/les_miserables.txt:10322:her, poor creature? I will tell you: it is the Thénardiers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10323:inn-keepers, peasants; and such people are unreasonable. They want
tests/les_miserables.txt:10326:heart of the winter; and you must have pity on such a being, my good
tests/les_miserables.txt:10328:cannot be done at that age. I am not a bad woman at bottom. It is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:10329:cowardliness and gluttony that have made me what I am. If I have drunk
tests/les_miserables.txt:10331:senses. When I was happy, it was only necessary to glance into my
tests/les_miserables.txt:10332:closets, and it would have been evident that I was not a coquettish and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10338:her neck bare, wringing her hands, and coughing with a dry, short
tests/les_miserables.txt:10339:cough, stammering softly with a voice of agony. Great sorrow is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10340:divine and terrible ray, which transfigures the unhappy. At that moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:10341:Fantine had become beautiful once more. From time to time she paused,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10342:and tenderly kissed the police agent’s coat. She would have softened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10343:heart of granite; but a heart of wood cannot be softened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10346:You will get six months. Now march! The Eternal Father in person could
tests/les_miserables.txt:10350:At these solemn words, _“the Eternal Father in person could do nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:10352:murmuring, “Mercy!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10355:Javert turned his back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10360:to him. He shut the door, leaned his back against it, and listened to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10361:Fantine’s despairing supplications.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10369:Javert raised his eyes and recognized M. Madeleine. He removed his hat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10372:“Excuse me, Mr. Mayor—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10375:The words “Mr. Mayor” produced a curious effect upon Fantine. She rose
tests/les_miserables.txt:10376:to her feet with one bound, like a spectre springing from the earth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10378:Madeleine before any one could prevent her, and gazing intently at him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10379:with a bewildered air, she cried:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10384:Then she burst into a laugh, and spit in his face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10386:M. Madeleine wiped his face, and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10388:“Inspector Javert, set this woman at liberty.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10391:Javert felt that he was on the verge of going mad. He experienced at
tests/les_miserables.txt:10393:emotions which he had ever undergone in all his life. To see a woman of
tests/les_miserables.txt:10394:the town spit in the mayor’s face was a thing so monstrous that, in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:10395:most daring flights of fancy, he would have regarded it as a sacrilege
tests/les_miserables.txt:10397:thought, he made a hideous comparison as to what this woman was, and as
tests/les_miserables.txt:10398:to what this mayor might be; and then he, with horror, caught a glimpse
tests/les_miserables.txt:10399:of I know not what simple explanation of this prodigious attack. But
tests/les_miserables.txt:10400:when he beheld that mayor, that magistrate, calmly wipe his face and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10401:say, _“Set this woman at liberty,”_ he underwent a sort of intoxication
tests/les_miserables.txt:10403:possible astonishment had been exceeded in his case. He remained mute.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10405:The words had produced no less strange an effect on Fantine. She raised
tests/les_miserables.txt:10406:her bare arm, and clung to the damper of the stove, like a person who
tests/les_miserables.txt:10407:is reeling. Nevertheless, she glanced about her, and began to speak in
tests/les_miserables.txt:10408:a low voice, as though talking to herself:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10411:months! Who said that? It is not possible that any one could have said
tests/les_miserables.txt:10412:that. I did not hear aright. It cannot have been that monster of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10415:go. That monster of a mayor, that old blackguard of a mayor, is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10416:cause of all. Just imagine, Monsieur Javert, he turned me out! all
tests/les_miserables.txt:10417:because of a pack of rascally women, who gossip in the workroom. If
tests/les_miserables.txt:10419:work honestly! Then I could no longer earn enough, and all this misery
tests/les_miserables.txt:10420:followed. In the first place, there is one improvement which these
tests/les_miserables.txt:10421:gentlemen of the police ought to make, and that is, to prevent prison
tests/les_miserables.txt:10422:contractors from wronging poor people. I will explain it to you, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:10423:see: you are earning twelve sous at shirt-making, the price falls to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10424:nine sous; and it is not enough to live on. Then one has to become
tests/les_miserables.txt:10425:whatever one can. As for me, I had my little Cosette, and I was
tests/les_miserables.txt:10426:actually forced to become a bad woman. Now you understand how it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:10427:that that blackguard of a mayor caused all the mischief. After that I
tests/les_miserables.txt:10428:stamped on that gentleman’s hat in front of the officers’ café; but he
tests/les_miserables.txt:10431:Monsieur Javert; and everywhere I behold women who are far more wicked
tests/les_miserables.txt:10432:than I, and who are much happier. O Monsieur Javert! it was you who
tests/les_miserables.txt:10435:perfectly honest. Ah! my God! I beg your pardon; I have unintentionally
tests/les_miserables.txt:10436:touched the damper of the stove, and it has made it smoke.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10440:speaking, he fumbled in his waistcoat, drew out his purse and opened
tests/les_miserables.txt:10441:it. It was empty. He put it back in his pocket. He said to Fantine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10442:“How much did you say that you owed?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10452:“Say, you fellows, did you see how I spit in his face? Ah! you old
tests/les_miserables.txt:10453:wretch of a mayor, you came here to frighten me, but I’m not afraid of
tests/les_miserables.txt:10458:So saying, she turned to the inspector again:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10460:“And yet, you see, Mr. Inspector, it is necessary to be just. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:10461:understand that you are just, Mr. Inspector; in fact, it is perfectly
tests/les_miserables.txt:10462:simple: a man amuses himself by putting snow down a woman’s back, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10463:that makes the officers laugh; one must divert themselves in some way;
tests/les_miserables.txt:10464:and we—well, we are here for them to amuse themselves with, of course!
tests/les_miserables.txt:10465:And then, you, you come; you are certainly obliged to preserve order,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10466:you lead off the woman who is in the wrong; but on reflection, since
tests/les_miserables.txt:10469:supporting my child. ‘Only, don’t do it again, you hussy!’ Oh! I won’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:10471:now; I will not stir. But to-day, you see, I cried because it hurt me.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10472:I was not expecting that snow from the gentleman at all; and then as I
tests/les_miserables.txt:10473:told you, I am not well; I have a cough; I seem to have a burning ball
tests/les_miserables.txt:10474:in my stomach, and the doctor tells me, ‘Take care of yourself.’ Here,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10478:She no longer wept, her voice was caressing; she placed Javert’s coarse
tests/les_miserables.txt:10479:hand on her delicate, white throat and looked smilingly at him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10481:All at once she rapidly adjusted her disordered garments, dropped the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10482:folds of her skirt, which had been pushed up as she dragged herself
tests/les_miserables.txt:10484:saying to the soldiers in a low voice, and with a friendly nod:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10486:“Children, Monsieur l’Inspecteur has said that I am to be released, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10490:She laid her hand on the latch of the door. One step more and she would
tests/les_miserables.txt:10493:Javert up to that moment had remained erect, motionless, with his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:10494:fixed on the ground, cast athwart this scene like some displaced
tests/les_miserables.txt:10495:statue, which is waiting to be put away somewhere.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10497:The sound of the latch roused him. He raised his head with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:10499:in proportion as the authority rests on a low level, ferocious in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10500:wild beast, atrocious in the man of no estate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10502:“Sergeant!” he cried, “don’t you see that that jade is walking off! Who
tests/les_miserables.txt:10508:Fantine trembled at the sound of Javert’s voice, and let go of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10509:latch as a thief relinquishes the article which he has stolen. At the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10510:sound of Madeleine’s voice she turned around, and from that moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:10511:forth she uttered no word, nor dared so much as to breathe freely, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:10512:her glance strayed from Madeleine to Javert, and from Javert to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10513:Madeleine in turn, according to which was speaking.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10518:liberty. Had he reached the point of forgetting the mayor’s presence?
tests/les_miserables.txt:10519:Had he finally declared to himself that it was impossible that any
tests/les_miserables.txt:10520:“authority” should have given such an order, and that the mayor must
tests/les_miserables.txt:10521:certainly have said one thing by mistake for another, without intending
tests/les_miserables.txt:10522:it? Or, in view of the enormities of which he had been a witness for
tests/les_miserables.txt:10523:the past two hours, did he say to himself, that it was necessary to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10524:recur to supreme resolutions, that it was indispensable that the small
tests/les_miserables.txt:10525:should be made great, that the police spy should transform himself into
tests/les_miserables.txt:10526:a magistrate, that the policeman should become a dispenser of justice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10528:government, society in its entirety, was personified in him, Javert?
tests/les_miserables.txt:10531:have just heard, Police Inspector Javert was seen to turn toward the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10532:mayor, pale, cold, with blue lips, and a look of despair, his whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:10533:body agitated by an imperceptible quiver and an unprecedented
tests/les_miserables.txt:10534:occurrence, and say to him, with downcast eyes but a firm voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10536:“Mr. Mayor, that cannot be.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10541:“This miserable woman has insulted a citizen.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10544:“Inspector Javert,” replied the mayor, in a calm and conciliating tone,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10546:matters to you. Here is the true state of the case: I was passing
tests/les_miserables.txt:10550:have been arrested by properly conducted police.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10555:“This wretch has just insulted Monsieur le Maire.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10558:“That concerns me,” said M. Madeleine. “My own insult belongs to me, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:10559:think. I can do what I please about it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10566:“Inspector Javert,” replied M. Madeleine, “the highest law is
tests/les_miserables.txt:10567:conscience. I have heard this woman; I know what I am doing.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10573:“Then content yourself with obeying.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10585:At this decisive word, Javert ventured to fix a searching look on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10586:mayor and to say, but in a tone of voice that was still profoundly
tests/les_miserables.txt:10587:respectful:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10591:authority. I confine myself, since Monsieur le Maire desires it, to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10593:Monsieur Bamatabois, who is an elector and the proprietor of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:10594:handsome house with a balcony, which forms the corner of the esplanade,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10595:three stories high and entirely of cut stone. Such things as there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:10596:in the world! In any case, Monsieur le Maire, this is a question of
tests/les_miserables.txt:10597:police regulations in the streets, and concerns me, and I shall detain
tests/les_miserables.txt:10601:Then M. Madeleine folded his arms, and said in a severe voice which no
tests/les_miserables.txt:10604:“The matter to which you refer is one connected with the municipal
tests/les_miserables.txt:10605:police. According to the terms of articles nine, eleven, fifteen, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10606:sixty-six of the code of criminal examination, I am the judge. I order
tests/les_miserables.txt:10615:“I refer you to article eighty-one of the law of the 13th of December,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10630:Javert received the blow erect, full in the face, in his breast, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10637:Nevertheless, she also was the prey to a strange confusion. She had
tests/les_miserables.txt:10638:just seen herself a subject of dispute between two opposing powers. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:10640:soul, her child, in combat before her very eyes; one of these men was
tests/les_miserables.txt:10641:drawing her towards darkness, the other was leading her back towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:10642:the light. In this conflict, viewed through the exaggerations of
tests/les_miserables.txt:10645:conquered the demon, and, strange to say, that which made her shudder
tests/les_miserables.txt:10646:from head to foot was the fact that this angel, this liberator, was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10650:she, then, been mistaken? Must she change her whole soul? She did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:10653:frightful shades of hatred crumble and melt within her, and something
tests/les_miserables.txt:10654:warm and ineffable, indescribable, which was both joy, confidence and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10658:said to her in a deliberate voice, like a serious man who does not wish
tests/les_miserables.txt:10659:to weep and who finds some difficulty in speaking:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10663:ignorant of the fact that you had left my shop. Why did you not apply
tests/les_miserables.txt:10664:to me? But here; I will pay your debts, I will send for your child, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:10666:please. I undertake the care of your child and yourself. You shall not
tests/les_miserables.txt:10668:require. You shall be honest and happy once more. And listen! I declare
tests/les_miserables.txt:10670:ceased to be virtuous and holy in the sight of God. Oh! poor woman.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10673:This was more than Fantine could bear. To have Cosette! To leave this
tests/les_miserables.txt:10674:life of infamy. To live free, rich, happy, respectable with Cosette; to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10677:could only give vent to two or three sobs, “Oh! Oh! Oh!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10681:before he could prevent her he felt her grasp his hand and press her
tests/les_miserables.txt:10697:M. Madeleine had Fantine removed to that infirmary which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:10698:established in his own house. He confided her to the sisters, who put
tests/les_miserables.txt:10699:her to bed. A burning fever had come on. She passed a part of the night
tests/les_miserables.txt:10703:breathing close to her bed; she drew aside the curtain and saw M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10705:gaze was full of pity, anguish, and supplication. She followed its
tests/les_miserables.txt:10706:direction, and saw that it was fixed on a crucifix which was nailed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10709:Thenceforth, M. Madeleine was transfigured in Fantine’s eyes. He seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:10710:to her to be clothed in light. He was absorbed in a sort of prayer. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:10727:He answered, responding to the first question which she had put to him
tests/les_miserables.txt:10740:“You have suffered much, poor mother. Oh! do not complain; you now have
tests/les_miserables.txt:10741:the dowry of the elect. It is thus that men are transformed into
tests/les_miserables.txt:10743:otherwise. You see this hell from which you have just emerged is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10744:first form of heaven. It was necessary to begin there.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10748:which two teeth were lacking.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10751:himself at the office of M. sur M. It was addressed to Paris, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10752:superscription ran: _To Monsieur Chabouillet, Secretary of Monsieur le
tests/les_miserables.txt:10753:Préfet of Police_. As the affair in the station-house had been bruited
tests/les_miserables.txt:10755:before it was sent off, and who recognized Javert’s handwriting on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10756:cover, thought that he was sending in his resignation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10759:one hundred and twenty francs. He sent them three hundred francs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10760:telling them to pay themselves from that sum, and to fetch the child
tests/les_miserables.txt:10761:instantly to M. sur M., where her sick mother required her presence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10764:let’s allow the child to go. This lark is going to turn into a milch
tests/les_miserables.txt:10765:cow. I see through it. Some ninny has taken a fancy to the mother.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10769:francs. In this memorandum two indisputable items figured up over three
tests/les_miserables.txt:10770:hundred francs,—one for the doctor, the other for the apothecary who
tests/les_miserables.txt:10771:had attended and physicked Éponine and Azelma through two long
tests/les_miserables.txt:10774:memorandum Thénardier wrote, _Received on account, three hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:10775:francs_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10777:M. Madeleine immediately sent three hundred francs more, and wrote,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10781:“Christi!” said Thénardier, “let’s not give up the child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10784:In the meantime, Fantine did not recover. She still remained in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10787:The sisters had at first only received and nursed “that woman” with
tests/les_miserables.txt:10788:repugnance. Those who have seen the bas-reliefs of Rheims will recall
tests/les_miserables.txt:10790:foolish virgins. The ancient scorn of the vestals for the ambubajæ is
tests/les_miserables.txt:10791:one of the most profound instincts of feminine dignity; the sisters
tests/les_miserables.txt:10792:felt it with the double force contributed by religion. But in a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:10796:child beside me, it will be a sign that God has pardoned me. While I
tests/les_miserables.txt:10798:me; I could not have borne her sad, astonished eyes. It was for her
tests/les_miserables.txt:10800:benediction of the good God when Cosette is here. I shall gaze at her;
tests/les_miserables.txt:10801:it will do me good to see that innocent creature. She knows nothing at
tests/les_miserables.txt:10806:M. Madeleine went to see her twice a day, and each time she asked him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10813:“To-morrow, perhaps. She may arrive at any moment. I am expecting her.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10816:And the mother’s pale face grew radiant.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10821:We have just said that she did not recover her health. On the contrary,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10822:her condition seemed to become more grave from week to week. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:10825:consequence of which the malady which had been smouldering within her
tests/les_miserables.txt:10827:were beginning to follow the fine Laënnec’s fine suggestions in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10828:study and treatment of chest maladies. The doctor sounded Fantine’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:10829:chest and shook his head.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10831:M. Madeleine said to the doctor:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:10836:“Has she not a child which she desires to see?” said the doctor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10848:“What did the doctor say?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10851:M. Madeleine forced himself to smile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10853:“He said that your child was to be brought speedily. That that would
tests/les_miserables.txt:10858:keeping my Cosette from me! Oh! she is coming. At last I behold
tests/les_miserables.txt:10859:happiness close beside me!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10862:In the meantime Thénardier did not “let go of the child,” and gave a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10863:hundred insufficient reasons for it. Cosette was not quite well enough
tests/les_miserables.txt:10865:petty but pressing debts in the neighborhood, and they were collecting
tests/les_miserables.txt:10866:the bills for them, etc., etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10868:“I shall send some one to fetch Cosette!” said Father Madeleine. “If
tests/les_miserables.txt:10869:necessary, I will go myself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10872:He wrote the following letter to Fantine’s dictation, and made her sign
tests/les_miserables.txt:10878:I have the honor to salute you with respect.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10882:In the meantime a serious incident occurred. Carve as we will the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10883:mysterious block of which our life is made, the black vein of destiny
tests/les_miserables.txt:10884:constantly reappears in it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10892:One morning M. Madeleine was in his study, occupied in arranging in
tests/les_miserables.txt:10893:advance some pressing matters connected with the mayor’s office, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:10894:case he should decide to take the trip to Montfermeil, when he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:10895:informed that Police Inspector Javert was desirous of speaking with
tests/les_miserables.txt:10896:him. Madeleine could not refrain from a disagreeable impression on
tests/les_miserables.txt:10897:hearing this name. Javert had avoided him more than ever since the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10898:affair of the police-station, and M. Madeleine had not seen him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10905:fixed on the docket which he was turning over and annotating, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:10906:contained the trials of the commission on highways for the infraction
tests/les_miserables.txt:10907:of police regulations. He did not disturb himself on Javert’s account.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10908:He could not help thinking of poor Fantine, and it suited him to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:10909:glacial in his manner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10911:Javert bestowed a respectful salute on the mayor, whose back was turned
tests/les_miserables.txt:10913:docket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10915:Javert advanced two or three paces into the study, and halted, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:10916:breaking the silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10919:made a lengthy study of this savage in the service of civilization,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10920:this singular composite of the Roman, the Spartan, the monk, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10921:corporal, this spy who was incapable of a lie, this unspotted police
tests/les_miserables.txt:10922:agent—if any physiognomist had known his secret and long-cherished
tests/les_miserables.txt:10923:aversion for M. Madeleine, his conflict with the mayor on the subject
tests/les_miserables.txt:10925:to himself, “What has taken place?” It was evident to any one
tests/les_miserables.txt:10926:acquainted with that clear, upright, sincere, honest, austere, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:10927:ferocious conscience, that Javert had but just gone through some great
tests/les_miserables.txt:10928:interior struggle. Javert had nothing in his soul which he had not also
tests/les_miserables.txt:10929:in his countenance. Like violent people in general, he was subject to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10930:abrupt changes of opinion. His physiognomy had never been more peculiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:10932:which there was neither rancor, anger, nor distrust; he halted a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:10933:paces in the rear of the mayor’s armchair, and there he stood,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10934:perfectly erect, in an attitude almost of discipline, with the cold,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10937:a movement, in genuine humility and tranquil resignation, calm,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10938:serious, hat in hand, with eyes cast down, and an expression which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:10939:half-way between that of a soldier in the presence of his officer and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10940:criminal in the presence of his judge, until it should please the mayor
tests/les_miserables.txt:10941:to turn round. All the sentiments as well as all the memories which one
tests/les_miserables.txt:10942:might have attributed to him had disappeared. That face, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:10943:impenetrable and simple as granite, no longer bore any trace of
tests/les_miserables.txt:10944:anything but a melancholy depression. His whole person breathed
tests/les_miserables.txt:10945:lowliness and firmness and an indescribable courageous despondency.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10952:Javert remained silent for an instant as though collecting his ideas,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10953:then raised his voice with a sort of sad solemnity, which did not,
tests/les_miserables.txt:10954:however, preclude simplicity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10956:“This is the matter, Mr. Mayor; a culpable act has been committed.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10959:“What act?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10962:“An inferior agent of the authorities has failed in respect, and in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:10963:gravest manner, towards a magistrate. I have come to bring the fact to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10977:“And who is the magistrate who has reason to complain of the agent?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:10983:M. Madeleine sat erect in his armchair. Javert went on, with a severe
tests/les_miserables.txt:10984:air and his eyes still cast down.
tests/les_miserables.txt:10986:“Mr. Mayor, I have come to request you to instigate the authorities to
tests/les_miserables.txt:10993:not suffice. Handing in one’s resignation is honorable. I have failed
tests/les_miserables.txt:11000:to-day, with justice.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11003:“Come, now! Why?” exclaimed M. Madeleine. “What nonsense is this? What
tests/les_miserables.txt:11004:is the meaning of this? What culpable act have you been guilty of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11006:to me? You accuse yourself; you wish to be superseded—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11017:Javert sighed from the very bottom of his chest, and resumed, still
tests/les_miserables.txt:11018:coldly and sadly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11020:“Mr. Mayor, six weeks ago, in consequence of the scene over that woman,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11027:“At the Prefecture of Police in Paris.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11030:M. Madeleine, who was not in the habit of laughing much oftener than
tests/les_miserables.txt:11033:“As a mayor who had encroached on the province of the police?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11036:“As an ex-convict.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11043:“I thought it was so. I had had an idea for a long time; a resemblance;
tests/les_miserables.txt:11044:inquiries which you had caused to be made at Faverolles; the strength
tests/les_miserables.txt:11045:of your loins; the adventure with old Fauchelevant; your skill in
tests/les_miserables.txt:11046:marksmanship; your leg, which you drag a little;—I hardly know what
tests/les_miserables.txt:11047:all,—absurdities! But, at all events, I took you for a certain Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:11051:“A certain—What did you say the name was?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11054:“Jean Valjean. He was a convict whom I was in the habit of seeing
tests/les_miserables.txt:11055:twenty years ago, when I was adjutant-guard of convicts at Toulon. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:11057:then he committed another theft, accompanied with violence, on a public
tests/les_miserables.txt:11059:ago, no one knows how, and he has been sought, I fancied. In short, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:11060:did this thing! Wrath impelled me; I denounced you at the Prefecture!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11063:M. Madeleine, who had taken up the docket again several moments before
tests/les_miserables.txt:11064:this, resumed with an air of perfect indifference:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11066:“And what reply did you receive?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11078:“It is lucky that you recognize the fact.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11081:“I am forced to do so, since the real Jean Valjean has been found.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11084:The sheet of paper which M. Madeleine was holding dropped from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11086:indescribable accent:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11091:Javert continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11094:neighborhood near Ailly-le-Haut-Clocher an old fellow who was called
tests/les_miserables.txt:11095:Father Champmathieu. He was a very wretched creature. No one paid any
tests/les_miserables.txt:11096:attention to him. No one knows what such people subsist on. Lately,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11098:cider apples from—Well, no matter, a theft had been committed, a wall
tests/les_miserables.txt:11099:scaled, branches of trees broken. My Champmathieu was arrested. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:11100:still had the branch of apple-tree in his hand. The scamp is locked up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11102:where Providence intervened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11104:“The jail being in a bad condition, the examining magistrate finds it
tests/les_miserables.txt:11105:convenient to transfer Champmathieu to Arras, where the departmental
tests/les_miserables.txt:11106:prison is situated. In this prison at Arras there is an ex-convict
tests/les_miserables.txt:11108:appointed turnkey of the house, because of good behavior. Mr. Mayor, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:11109:sooner had Champmathieu arrived than Brevet exclaims: ‘Eh! Why, I know
tests/les_miserables.txt:11112:feigns astonishment. ‘Don’t play the innocent dodge,’ says Brevet. ‘You
tests/les_miserables.txt:11115:You understand. The case is investigated. The thing was well ventilated
tests/les_miserables.txt:11116:for me. This is what they discovered: This Champmathieu had been,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11117:thirty years ago, a pruner of trees in various localities, notably at
tests/les_miserables.txt:11118:Faverolles. There all trace of him was lost. A long time afterwards he
tests/les_miserables.txt:11123:Another fact. This Valjean’s Christian name was Jean, and his mother’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:11126:the purpose of concealing himself, and have called himself Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:11127:Mathieu? He goes to Auvergne. The local pronunciation turns _Jean_ into
tests/les_miserables.txt:11128:_Chan_—he is called Chan Mathieu. Our man offers no opposition, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11132:those classes a family often disappears. Search was made, and nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:11133:was found. When such people are not mud, they are dust. And then, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:11134:the beginning of the story dates thirty years back, there is no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:11136:Toulon. Besides Brevet, there are only two convicts in existence who
tests/les_miserables.txt:11137:have seen Jean Valjean; they are Cochepaille and Chenildieu, and are
tests/les_miserables.txt:11138:sentenced for life. They are taken from the galleys and confronted with
tests/les_miserables.txt:11142:precisely at this moment that I forwarded my denunciation to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11143:Prefecture in Paris. I was told that I had lost my reason, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:11144:Jean Valjean is at Arras, in the power of the authorities. You can
tests/les_miserables.txt:11147:Champmathieu is conducted to me—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11152:Javert replied, his face incorruptible, and as melancholy as ever:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11155:Valjean. I recognized him also.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11158:M. Madeleine resumed in, a very low voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11163:Javert began to laugh, with that mournful laugh which comes from
tests/les_miserables.txt:11164:profound conviction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11169:He stood there thoughtfully for a moment, mechanically taking pinches
tests/les_miserables.txt:11170:of powdered wood for blotting ink from the wooden bowl which stood on
tests/les_miserables.txt:11174:I could have thought otherwise. I beg your pardon, Mr. Mayor.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11177:Javert, as he addressed these grave and supplicating words to the man,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11178:who six weeks before had humiliated him in the presence of the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:11180:was unconsciously full of simplicity and dignity,—M. Madeleine made no
tests/les_miserables.txt:11187:has his previous conviction against him. To climb a wall, to break a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11188:branch, to purloin apples, is a mischievous trick in a child; for a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:11189:it is a misdemeanor; for a convict it is a crime. Robbing and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11191:correctional police; it is a matter for the Court of Assizes. It is no
tests/les_miserables.txt:11194:return, I hope. The deuce! there is plenty to dispute in the matter, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:11196:dog. That is the way I recognized him. Any other man would have felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:11197:that things were getting hot for him; he would struggle, he would cry
tests/les_miserables.txt:11199:cetera_. But he has not the appearance of understanding; he says, ‘I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:11201:he pretends to be stupid; it is far better. Oh! the rogue is clever!
tests/les_miserables.txt:11202:But it makes no difference. The proofs are there. He has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:11203:recognized by four persons; the old scamp will be condemned. The case
tests/les_miserables.txt:11208:M. Madeleine had turned to his desk again, and taken up his docket, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11214:Javert, you will betake yourself at once to the house of the woman
tests/les_miserables.txt:11215:Buseaupied, who sells herbs at the corner of the Rue Saint-Saulve. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:11216:will tell her that she must enter her complaint against carter Pierre
tests/les_miserables.txt:11217:Chesnelong. The man is a brute, who came near crushing this woman and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11218:her child. He must be punished. You will then go to M. Charcellay, Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:11219:Montre-de-Champigny. He complained that there is a gutter on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11220:adjoining house which discharges rain-water on his premises, and is
tests/les_miserables.txt:11222:the infractions of police regulations which have been reported to me in
tests/les_miserables.txt:11223:the Rue Guibourg, at Widow Doris’s, and Rue du Garraud-Blanc, at Madame
tests/les_miserables.txt:11224:Renée le Bossé’s, and you will prepare documents. But I am giving you a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11235:“Why, I thought that I had said to Monsieur le Maire that the case was
tests/les_miserables.txt:11236:to be tried to-morrow, and that I am to set out by diligence to-night.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11239:M. Madeleine made an imperceptible movement.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11241:“And how long will the case last?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11244:“One day, at the most. The judgment will be pronounced to-morrow
tests/les_miserables.txt:11245:evening at latest. But I shall not wait for the sentence, which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:11246:certain; I shall return here as soon as my deposition has been taken.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11255:“Excuse me, Mr. Mayor,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11259:“Mr. Mayor, there is still something of which I must remind you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11271:fault. Moreover, this is an offence which concerns me. Javert, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:11276:Javert gazed at M. Madeleine with his candid eyes, in whose depths his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11277:not very enlightened but pure and rigid conscience seemed visible, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11278:said in a tranquil voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11280:“Mr. Mayor, I cannot grant you that.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11283:“I repeat,” replied M. Madeleine, “that the matter concerns me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11286:But Javert, heeding his own thought only, continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11288:“So far as exaggeration is concerned, I am not exaggerating. This is
tests/les_miserables.txt:11289:the way I reason: I have suspected you unjustly. That is nothing. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:11290:our right to cherish suspicion, although suspicion directed above
tests/les_miserables.txt:11292:object of wreaking my vengeance, I have denounced you as a convict,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11293:you, a respectable man, a mayor, a magistrate! That is serious, very
tests/les_miserables.txt:11296:should have declared him unworthy of the service, and have expelled
tests/les_miserables.txt:11298:the course of my life towards others. That is just. I have done well.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11299:Now, if I were not severe towards myself, all the justice that I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:11300:done would become injustice. Ought I to spare myself more than others?
tests/les_miserables.txt:11301:No! What! I should be good for nothing but to chastise others, and not
tests/les_miserables.txt:11302:myself! Why, I should be a blackguard! Those who say, ‘That blackguard
tests/les_miserables.txt:11304:you should treat me kindly; your kindness roused sufficient bad blood
tests/les_miserables.txt:11305:in me when it was directed to others. I want none of it for myself. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:11306:kindness which consists in upholding a woman of the town against a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11307:citizen, the police agent against the mayor, the man who is down
tests/les_miserables.txt:11308:against the man who is up in the world, is what I call false kindness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11309:That is the sort of kindness which disorganizes society. Good God! it
tests/les_miserables.txt:11310:is very easy to be kind; the difficulty lies in being just. Come! if
tests/les_miserables.txt:11313:treat any other man. When I have subdued malefactors, when I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:11314:proceeded with vigor against rascals, I have often said to myself, ‘If
tests/les_miserables.txt:11315:you flinch, if I ever catch you in fault, you may rest at your ease!’ I
tests/les_miserables.txt:11316:have flinched, I have caught myself in a fault. So much the worse!
tests/les_miserables.txt:11317:Come, discharged, cashiered, expelled! That is well. I have arms. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:11318:will till the soil; it makes no difference to me. Mr. Mayor, the good
tests/les_miserables.txt:11319:of the service demands an example. I simply require the discharge of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11320:Inspector Javert.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11323:All this was uttered in a proud, humble, despairing, yet convinced
tests/les_miserables.txt:11324:tone, which lent indescribable grandeur to this singular, honest man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11330:Javert recoiled, and said in a wild voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11332:“Excuse me, Mr. Mayor, but this must not be. A mayor does not offer his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11333:hand to a police spy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11338:“A police spy, yes; from the moment when I have misused the police. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:11339:am no more than a police spy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11342:Then he bowed profoundly, and directed his steps towards the door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11344:There he wheeled round, and with eyes still downcast:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11346:“Mr. Mayor,” he said, “I shall continue to serve until I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:11351:sure step, which died away on the pavement of the corridor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11364:The incidents the reader is about to peruse were not all known at M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11365:sur M. But the small portion of them which became known left such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11368:the reader will encounter two or three improbable circumstances, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:11369:we preserve out of respect for the truth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11372:see Fantine according to his wont.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11374:Before entering Fantine’s room, he had Sister Simplice summoned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11376:The two nuns who performed the services of nurse in the infirmary,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11377:Lazariste ladies, like all sisters of charity, bore the names of Sister
tests/les_miserables.txt:11378:Perpétue and Sister Simplice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11380:Sister Perpétue was an ordinary villager, a sister of charity in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11381:coarse style, who had entered the service of God as one enters any
tests/les_miserables.txt:11382:other service. She was a nun as other women are cooks. This type is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:11383:so very rare. The monastic orders gladly accept this heavy peasant
tests/les_miserables.txt:11384:earthenware, which is easily fashioned into a Capuchin or an Ursuline.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11385:These rustics are utilized for the rough work of devotion. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:11387:the one turns into the other without much effort; the fund of ignorance
tests/les_miserables.txt:11388:common to the village and the cloister is a preparation ready at hand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11389:and places the boor at once on the same footing as the monk: a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:11390:more amplitude in the smock, and it becomes a frock. Sister Perpétue
tests/les_miserables.txt:11391:was a robust nun from Marines near Pontoise, who chattered her patois,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11392:droned, grumbled, sugared the potion according to the bigotry or the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11393:hypocrisy of the invalid, treated her patients abruptly, roughly, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:11394:crabbed with the dying, almost flung God in their faces, stoned their
tests/les_miserables.txt:11398:Sister Simplice was white, with a waxen pallor. Beside Sister Perpétue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11399:she was the taper beside the candle. Vincent de Paul has divinely
tests/les_miserables.txt:11400:traced the features of the Sister of Charity in these admirable words,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11401:in which he mingles as much freedom as servitude: “They shall have for
tests/les_miserables.txt:11402:their convent only the house of the sick; for cell only a hired room;
tests/les_miserables.txt:11403:for chapel only their parish church; for cloister only the streets of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11404:the town and the wards of the hospitals; for enclosure only obedience;
tests/les_miserables.txt:11406:was realized in the living person of Sister Simplice: she had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:11408:could have told Sister Simplice’s age. She was a person—we dare not say
tests/les_miserables.txt:11409:a woman—who was gentle, austere, well-bred, cold, and who had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:11411:solid than granite. She touched the unhappy with fingers that were
tests/les_miserables.txt:11412:charmingly pure and fine. There was, so to speak, silence in her
tests/les_miserables.txt:11413:speech; she said just what was necessary, and she possessed a tone of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11414:voice which would have equally edified a confessional or enchanted a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11415:drawing-room. This delicacy accommodated itself to the serge gown,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11416:finding in this harsh contact a continual reminder of heaven and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11418:said, for any interest whatever, even in indifference, any single thing
tests/les_miserables.txt:11419:which was not the truth, the sacred truth, was Sister Simplice’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:11420:distinctive trait; it was the accent of her virtue. She was almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:11421:renowned in the congregation for this imperturbable veracity. The Abbé
tests/les_miserables.txt:11422:Sicard speaks of Sister Simplice in a letter to the deaf-mute Massieu.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11423:However pure and sincere we may be, we all bear upon our candor the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11424:crack of the little, innocent lie. She did not. Little lie, innocent
tests/les_miserables.txt:11425:lie—does such a thing exist? To lie is the absolute form of evil. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:11427:is the very face of the demon. Satan has two names; he is called Satan
tests/les_miserables.txt:11429:The result was the whiteness which we have mentioned—a whiteness which
tests/les_miserables.txt:11430:covered even her lips and her eyes with radiance. Her smile was white,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11431:her glance was white. There was not a single spider’s web, not a grain
tests/les_miserables.txt:11432:of dust, on the glass window of that conscience. On entering the order
tests/les_miserables.txt:11433:of Saint Vincent de Paul, she had taken the name of Simplice by special
tests/les_miserables.txt:11434:choice. Simplice of Sicily, as we know, is the saint who preferred to
tests/les_miserables.txt:11436:been born at Segesta when she had been born at Syracuse—a lie which
tests/les_miserables.txt:11439:Sister Simplice, on her entrance into the order, had had two faults
tests/les_miserables.txt:11440:which she had gradually corrected: she had a taste for dainties, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11441:she liked to receive letters. She never read anything but a book of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11442:prayers printed in Latin, in coarse type. She did not understand Latin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11445:This pious woman had conceived an affection for Fantine, probably
tests/les_miserables.txt:11447:exclusively to her care.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11449:M. Madeleine took Sister Simplice apart and recommended Fantine to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:11450:in a singular tone, which the sister recalled later on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11452:On leaving the sister, he approached Fantine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11454:Fantine awaited M. Madeleine’s appearance every day as one awaits a ray
tests/les_miserables.txt:11473:was noticed that there was a moment when his countenance became very
tests/les_miserables.txt:11474:sombre. But this was explained when it became known that the doctor had
tests/les_miserables.txt:11478:Then he returned to the town-hall, and the clerk observed him
tests/les_miserables.txt:11479:attentively examining a road map of France which hung in his study. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:11480:wrote a few figures on a bit of paper with a pencil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11489:Fleming named Master Scaufflaer, French Scaufflaire, who let out
tests/les_miserables.txt:11490:“horses and cabriolets as desired.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11493:In order to reach this Scaufflaire, the shortest way was to take the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11494:little-frequented street in which was situated the parsonage of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11495:parish in which M. Madeleine resided. The curé was, it was said, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11496:worthy, respectable, and sensible man. At the moment when M. Madeleine
tests/les_miserables.txt:11498:street, and this person noticed this: After the mayor had passed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11500:retraced his steps to the door of the parsonage, which had an iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:11501:knocker. He laid his hand quickly on the knocker and lifted it; then he
tests/les_miserables.txt:11503:lapse of a few seconds, instead of allowing the knocker to fall
tests/les_miserables.txt:11504:abruptly, he placed it gently, and resumed his way with a sort of haste
tests/les_miserables.txt:11505:which had not been apparent previously.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11507:M. Madeleine found Master Scaufflaire at home, engaged in stitching a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11510:“Master Scaufflaire,” he inquired, “have you a good horse?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11517:“I mean a horse which can travel twenty leagues in a day.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11520:“The deuce!” said the Fleming. “Twenty leagues!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11526:“Hitched to a cabriolet?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11532:“And how long can he rest at the end of his journey?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11535:“He must be able to set out again on the next day if necessary.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11544:“The deuce! the deuce! And it is twenty leagues?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11547:M. Madeleine drew from his pocket the paper on which he had pencilled
tests/les_miserables.txt:11555:little white horse—you may have seen him pass occasionally; he is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11557:make a saddle-horse of him at first. Bah! He reared, he kicked, he laid
tests/les_miserables.txt:11558:everybody flat on the ground. He was thought to be vicious, and no one
tests/les_miserables.txt:11559:knew what to do with him. I bought him. I harnessed him to a carriage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11566:“And he will accomplish the trip?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11570:But here are the conditions.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11576:“In the first place, you will give him half an hour’s breathing spell
tests/les_miserables.txt:11579:I have noticed that in inns the oats are more often drunk by the stable
tests/les_miserables.txt:11586:“In the second place—is the cabriolet for Monsieur le Maire?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11612:“I am to have thirty francs a day. The days of rest to be paid for
tests/les_miserables.txt:11620:“Here is the pay for two days in advance.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11623:“Fourthly, for such a journey a cabriolet would be too heavy, and would
tests/les_miserables.txt:11624:fatigue the horse. Monsieur le Maire must consent to travel in a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:11628:“I consent to that.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11631:“It is light, but it has no cover.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11634:“That makes no difference to me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11637:“Has Monsieur le Maire reflected that we are in the middle of winter?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11642:“That it is very cold?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11645:M. Madeleine preserved silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11647:Master Scaufflaire continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11655:morning at half-past four o’clock.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11658:“Of course, Monsieur le Maire,” replied Scaufflaire; then, scratching a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11659:speck in the wood of the table with his thumb-nail, he resumed with
tests/les_miserables.txt:11660:that careless air which the Flemings understand so well how to mingle
tests/les_miserables.txt:11667:He had been thinking of nothing else since the beginning of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11668:conversation, but he did not know why he had not dared to put the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11674:hill. Are there many descends between here and the place whither you
tests/les_miserables.txt:11678:“Do not forget to be at my door at precisely half-past four o’clock
tests/les_miserables.txt:11685:again; it was the mayor once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11687:He still wore the same impassive and preoccupied air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11689:“Monsieur Scaufflaire,” said he, “at what sum do you estimate the value
tests/les_miserables.txt:11690:of the horse and tilbury which you are to let to me,—the one bearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:11700:“Does Monsieur le Maire wish to purchase them or me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11703:“No; but I wish to guarantee you in any case. You shall give me back
tests/les_miserables.txt:11705:cabriolet?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11708:“Five hundred francs, Monsieur le Maire.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11717:Master Scaufflaire experienced a frightful regret that he had not said
tests/les_miserables.txt:11718:a thousand francs. Besides the horse and tilbury together were worth
tests/les_miserables.txt:11719:but a hundred crowns.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11721:The Fleming called his wife, and related the affair to her. “Where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11722:devil could Monsieur le Maire be going?” They held counsel together.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11727:on the chimney-piece. The Fleming picked it up and studied it. “Five,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11742:to return from Master Scaufflaire’s, as though the parsonage door had
tests/les_miserables.txt:11743:been a temptation for him, and he had wished to avoid it. He ascended
tests/les_miserables.txt:11744:to his room, and there he shut himself up, which was a very simple act,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11745:since he liked to go to bed early. Nevertheless, the portress of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11746:factory, who was, at the same time, M. Madeleine’s only servant,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11747:noticed that the latter’s light was extinguished at half-past eight,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11748:and she mentioned it to the cashier when he came home, adding:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:11753:This cashier occupied a room situated directly under M. Madeleine’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:11754:chamber. He paid no heed to the portress’s words, but went to bed and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11756:heard a noise above his head. He listened; it was a footstep pacing
tests/les_miserables.txt:11757:back and forth, as though some one were walking in the room above him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11758:He listened more attentively, and recognized M. Madeleine’s step. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:11759:struck him as strange; usually, there was no noise in M. Madeleine’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:11760:chamber until he rose in the morning. A moment later the cashier heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:11761:a noise which resembled that of a cupboard being opened, and then shut
tests/les_miserables.txt:11762:again; then a piece of furniture was disarranged; then a pause ensued;
tests/les_miserables.txt:11763:then the step began again. The cashier sat up in bed, quite awake now,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11765:lighted window reflected on the opposite wall; from the direction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11766:the rays, it could only come from the window of M. Madeleine’s chamber.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11767:The reflection wavered, as though it came rather from a fire which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:11768:been lighted than from a candle. The shadow of the window-frame was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:11769:shown, which indicated that the window was wide open. The fact that
tests/les_miserables.txt:11770:this window was open in such cold weather was surprising. The cashier
tests/les_miserables.txt:11772:was still passing slowly and regularly back and forth overhead.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11774:The reflection was still visible on the wall, but now it was pale and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11775:peaceful, like the reflection of a lamp or of a candle. The window was
tests/les_miserables.txt:11778:This is what had taken place in M. Madeleine’s room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11789:We have already gazed into the depths of this conscience; the moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:11790:has now come when we must take another look into it. We do so not
tests/les_miserables.txt:11792:existence than this sort of contemplation. The eye of the spirit can
tests/les_miserables.txt:11793:nowhere find more dazzling brilliance and more shadow than in man; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:11794:can fix itself on no other thing which is more formidable, more
tests/les_miserables.txt:11795:complicated, more mysterious, and more infinite. There is a spectacle
tests/les_miserables.txt:11796:more grand than the sea; it is heaven: there is a spectacle more grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:11797:than heaven; it is the inmost recesses of the soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11799:To make the poem of the human conscience, were it only with reference
tests/les_miserables.txt:11800:to a single man, were it only in connection with the basest of men,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11801:would be to blend all epics into one superior and definitive epic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11802:Conscience is the chaos of chimæras, of lusts, and of temptations; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11803:furnace of dreams; the lair of ideas of which we are ashamed; it is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11805:Penetrate, at certain hours, past the livid face of a human being who
tests/les_miserables.txt:11806:is engaged in reflection, and look behind, gaze into that soul, gaze
tests/les_miserables.txt:11807:into that obscurity. There, beneath that external silence, battles of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11808:giants, like those recorded in Homer, are in progress; skirmishes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11810:circles, as in Dante. What a solemn thing is this infinity which every
tests/les_miserables.txt:11811:man bears within him, and which he measures with despair against the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11812:caprices of his brain and the actions of his life!
tests/les_miserables.txt:11814:Alighieri one day met with a sinister-looking door, before which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:11821:What the Bishop had wished to make of him, that he carried out. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:11824:He succeeded in disappearing, sold the Bishop’s silver, reserving only
tests/les_miserables.txt:11825:the candlesticks as a souvenir, crept from town to town, traversed
tests/les_miserables.txt:11826:France, came to M. sur M., conceived the idea which we have mentioned,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11827:accomplished what we have related, succeeded in rendering himself safe
tests/les_miserables.txt:11828:from seizure and inaccessible, and, thenceforth, established at M. sur
tests/les_miserables.txt:11829:M., happy in feeling his conscience saddened by the past and the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:11830:half of his existence belied by the last, he lived in peace, reassured
tests/les_miserables.txt:11831:and hopeful, having henceforth only two thoughts,—to conceal his name
tests/les_miserables.txt:11832:and to sanctify his life; to escape men and to return to God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11834:These two thoughts were so closely intertwined in his mind that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:11836:imperative and ruled his slightest actions. In general, they conspired
tests/les_miserables.txt:11837:to regulate the conduct of his life; they turned him towards the gloom;
tests/les_miserables.txt:11838:they rendered him kindly and simple; they counselled him to the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:11839:things. Sometimes, however, they conflicted. In that case, as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11840:reader will remember, the man whom all the country of M. sur M. called
tests/les_miserables.txt:11841:M. Madeleine did not hesitate to sacrifice the first to the second—his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11842:security to his virtue. Thus, in spite of all his reserve and all his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11843:prudence, he had preserved the Bishop’s candlesticks, worn mourning for
tests/les_miserables.txt:11845:way, collected information regarding the families at Faverolles, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11846:saved old Fauchelevent’s life, despite the disquieting insinuations of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11851:At the same time, it must be confessed, nothing just like this had yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:11854:Never had the two ideas which governed the unhappy man whose sufferings
tests/les_miserables.txt:11856:confusedly but profoundly at the very first words pronounced by Javert,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11857:when the latter entered his study. At the moment when that name, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:11858:he had buried beneath so many layers, was so strangely articulated, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:11859:was struck with stupor, and as though intoxicated with the sinister
tests/les_miserables.txt:11860:eccentricity of his destiny; and through this stupor he felt that
tests/les_miserables.txt:11861:shudder which precedes great shocks. He bent like an oak at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11862:approach of a storm, like a soldier at the approach of an assault. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:11863:felt shadows filled with thunders and lightnings descending upon his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11864:head. As he listened to Javert, the first thought which occurred to him
tests/les_miserables.txt:11865:was to go, to run and denounce himself, to take that Champmathieu out
tests/les_miserables.txt:11866:of prison and place himself there; this was as painful and as poignant
tests/les_miserables.txt:11867:as an incision in the living flesh. Then it passed away, and he said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:11869:instinct, and recoiled before heroism.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11872:so many years of repentance and abnegation, in the midst of a penitence
tests/les_miserables.txt:11873:admirably begun, if this man had not flinched for an instant, even in
tests/les_miserables.txt:11874:the presence of so terrible a conjecture, but had continued to walk
tests/les_miserables.txt:11875:with the same step towards this yawning precipice, at the bottom of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11876:which lay heaven; that would have been beautiful; but it was not thus.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11877:We must render an account of the things which went on in this soul, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11878:we can only tell what there was there. He was carried away, at first,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11879:by the instinct of self-preservation; he rallied all his ideas in
tests/les_miserables.txt:11880:haste, stifled his emotions, took into consideration Javert’s presence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11881:that great danger, postponed all decision with the firmness of terror,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11882:shook off thought as to what he had to do, and resumed his calmness as
tests/les_miserables.txt:11883:a warrior picks up his buckler.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11887:measures,” as they may be called. Everything was still confused, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11888:jostling together in his brain. His trouble was so great that he could
tests/les_miserables.txt:11889:not perceive the form of a single idea distinctly, and he could have
tests/les_miserables.txt:11890:told nothing about himself, except that he had received a great blow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11893:visit, through a kindly instinct, telling himself that he must behave
tests/les_miserables.txt:11894:thus, and recommend her well to the sisters, in case he should be
tests/les_miserables.txt:11898:beyond the shadow of any suspicion, there could be nothing out of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11899:way in being a witness to what was to take place, and he engaged the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11900:tilbury from Scaufflaire in order to be prepared in any event.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11904:On returning to his room, he communed with himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11906:He examined the situation, and found it unprecedented; so unprecedented
tests/les_miserables.txt:11907:that in the midst of his reverie he rose from his chair, moved by some
tests/les_miserables.txt:11908:inexplicable impulse of anxiety, and bolted his door. He feared lest
tests/les_miserables.txt:11909:something more should enter. He was barricading himself against
tests/les_miserables.txt:11918:Alas! That on which he desired to close the door had already entered;
tests/les_miserables.txt:11919:that which he desired to blind was staring him in the face,—his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11920:conscience.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11922:His conscience; that is to say, God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11924:Nevertheless, he deluded himself at first; he had a feeling of security
tests/les_miserables.txt:11925:and of solitude; the bolt once drawn, he thought himself impregnable;
tests/les_miserables.txt:11926:the candle extinguished, he felt himself invisible. Then he took
tests/les_miserables.txt:11932:manner? Who can that Champmathieu be? So he resembles me! Is it
tests/les_miserables.txt:11933:possible? When I reflect that yesterday I was so tranquil, and so far
tests/les_miserables.txt:11934:from suspecting anything! What was I doing yesterday at this hour? What
tests/les_miserables.txt:11935:is there in this incident? What will the end be? What is to be done?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:11938:This was the torment in which he found himself. His brain had lost its
tests/les_miserables.txt:11939:power of retaining ideas; they passed like waves, and he clutched his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11942:Nothing but anguish extricated itself from this tumult which
tests/les_miserables.txt:11943:overwhelmed his will and his reason, and from which he sought to draw
tests/les_miserables.txt:11953:themselves in his meditation, and he was able to catch a glimpse with
tests/les_miserables.txt:11954:precision of the reality,—not the whole situation, but some of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11955:details. He began by recognizing the fact that, critical and
tests/les_miserables.txt:11956:extraordinary as was this situation, he was completely master of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11958:This only caused an increase of his stupor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:11960:Independently of the severe and religious aim which he had assigned to
tests/les_miserables.txt:11961:his actions, all that he had made up to that day had been nothing but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11962:hole in which to bury his name. That which he had always feared most of
tests/les_miserables.txt:11963:all in his hours of self-communion, during his sleepless nights, was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:11964:ever hear that name pronounced; he had said to himself, that that would
tests/les_miserables.txt:11966:its reappearance it would cause his new life to vanish from about him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11969:said to him at such moments that the hour would come when that name
tests/les_miserables.txt:11972:formidable light, capable of dissipating the mystery in which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:11974:that name would not menace him, that that light would but produce an
tests/les_miserables.txt:11975:obscurity more dense, that this rent veil would but increase the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11976:mystery, that this earthquake would solidify his edifice, that this
tests/les_miserables.txt:11977:prodigious incident would have no other result, so far as he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:11978:concerned, if so it seemed good to him, than that of rendering his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11979:existence at once clearer and more impenetrable, and that, out of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:11980:confrontation with the phantom of Jean Valjean, the good and worthy
tests/les_miserables.txt:11981:citizen Monsieur Madeleine would emerge more honored, more peaceful,
tests/les_miserables.txt:11982:and more respected than ever—if any one had told him that, he would
tests/les_miserables.txt:11984:all this was precisely what had just come to pass; all that
tests/les_miserables.txt:11985:accumulation of impossibilities was a fact, and God had permitted these
tests/les_miserables.txt:11986:wild fancies to become real things!
tests/les_miserables.txt:11988:His reverie continued to grow clearer. He came more and more to an
tests/les_miserables.txt:11991:It seemed to him that he had but just waked up from some inexplicable
tests/les_miserables.txt:11992:dream, and that he found himself slipping down a declivity in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11993:middle of the night, erect, shivering, holding back all in vain, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:11994:very brink of the abyss. He distinctly perceived in the darkness a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11997:gulf might close once more, it was necessary that some one, himself or
tests/les_miserables.txt:11999:course.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12001:The light became complete, and he acknowledged this to himself: That
tests/les_miserables.txt:12002:his place was empty in the galleys; that do what he would, it was still
tests/les_miserables.txt:12003:awaiting him; that the theft from little Gervais had led him back to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12004:it; that this vacant place would await him, and draw him on until he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12007:that a certain Champmathieu had that ill luck, and that, as regards
tests/les_miserables.txt:12009:Champmathieu, present in society under the name of M. Madeleine, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:12011:over the head of that Champmathieu this stone of infamy which, like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12012:stone of the sepulchre, falls once, never to rise again.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12015:All this was so strange and so violent, that there suddenly took place
tests/les_miserables.txt:12016:in him that indescribable movement, which no man feels more than two or
tests/les_miserables.txt:12017:three times in the course of his life, a sort of convulsion of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12018:conscience which stirs up all that there is doubtful in the heart,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12019:which is composed of irony, of joy, and of despair, and which may be
tests/les_miserables.txt:12020:called an outburst of inward laughter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12022:He hastily relighted his candle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12026:but one partly open door through which my past might invade my life,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12028:annoying me so long; that terrible instinct which seemed to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:12029:divined me, which had divined me—good God! and which followed me
tests/les_miserables.txt:12031:thrown off the scent, engaged elsewhere, absolutely turned from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12032:trail: henceforth he is satisfied; he will leave me in peace; he has
tests/les_miserables.txt:12035:me, and I count for nothing in it! Ah! but where is the misfortune in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12037:catastrophe had happened to me! After all, if it does bring harm to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12038:some one, that is not my fault in the least: it is Providence which has
tests/les_miserables.txt:12039:done it all; it is because it wishes it so to be, evidently. Have I the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12041:I meddle? It does not concern me; what! I am not satisfied: but what
tests/les_miserables.txt:12042:more do I want? The goal to which I have aspired for so many years, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12043:dream of my nights, the object of my prayers to Heaven,—security,—I
tests/les_miserables.txt:12044:have now attained; it is God who wills it; I can do nothing against the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12045:will of God, and why does God will it? In order that I may continue
tests/les_miserables.txt:12047:and encouraging example, that it may be said at last, that a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:12048:happiness has been attached to the penance which I have undergone, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12049:to that virtue to which I have returned. Really, I do not understand
tests/les_miserables.txt:12051:curé, and to ask his advice; this is evidently what he would have said
tests/les_miserables.txt:12052:to me: It is settled; let things take their course; let the good God do
tests/les_miserables.txt:12056:Thus did he address himself in the depths of his own conscience,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12057:bending over what may be called his own abyss; he rose from his chair,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12058:and began to pace the room: “Come,” said he, “let us think no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:12063:One can no more prevent thought from recurring to an idea than one can
tests/les_miserables.txt:12064:the sea from returning to the shore: the sailor calls it the tide; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12065:guilty man calls it remorse; God upheaves the soul as he does the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12066:ocean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12069:gloomy dialogue in which it was he who spoke and he who listened,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12070:saying that which he would have preferred to ignore, and listened to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12071:that which he would have preferred not to hear, yielding to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:12072:mysterious power which said to him: “Think!” as it said to another
tests/les_miserables.txt:12073:condemned man, two thousand years ago, “March on!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12076:Before proceeding further, and in order to make ourselves fully
tests/les_miserables.txt:12077:understood, let us insist upon one necessary observation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12079:It is certain that people do talk to themselves; there is no living
tests/les_miserables.txt:12081:more magnificent mystery than when it goes from thought to conscience
tests/les_miserables.txt:12082:within a man, and when it returns from conscience to thought; it is in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12083:this sense only that the words so often employed in this chapter, _he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12084:said, he exclaimed_, must be understood; one speaks to one’s self,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12085:talks to one’s self, exclaims to one’s self without breaking the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12086:external silence; there is a great tumult; everything about us talks
tests/les_miserables.txt:12087:except the mouth. The realities of the soul are nonetheless realities
tests/les_miserables.txt:12088:because they are not visible and palpable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12091:“settled resolve.” He confessed to himself that all that he had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:12093:course, to let the good God do as he liked,” was simply horrible; to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12094:allow this error of fate and of men to be carried out, not to hinder
tests/les_miserables.txt:12095:it, to lend himself to it through his silence, to do nothing, in short,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12096:was to do everything! that this was hypocritical baseness in the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:12097:degree! that it was a base, cowardly, sneaking, abject, hideous crime!
tests/les_miserables.txt:12099:For the first time in eight years, the wretched man had just tasted the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12100:bitter savor of an evil thought and of an evil action.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12104:He continued to question himself. He asked himself severely what he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:12105:meant by this, “My object is attained!” He declared to himself that his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12106:life really had an object; but what object? To conceal his name? To
tests/les_miserables.txt:12107:deceive the police? Was it for so petty a thing that he had done all
tests/les_miserables.txt:12108:that he had done? Had he not another and a grand object, which was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12109:true one—to save, not his person, but his soul; to become honest and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12110:good once more; to be a just man? Was it not that above all, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:12111:alone, which he had always desired, which the Bishop had enjoined upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:12113:God! he was re-opening it by committing an infamous action! He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12114:becoming a thief once more, and the most odious of thieves! He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12115:robbing another of his existence, his life, his peace, his place in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12116:sunshine. He was becoming an assassin. He was murdering, morally
tests/les_miserables.txt:12117:murdering, a wretched man. He was inflicting on him that frightful
tests/les_miserables.txt:12118:living death, that death beneath the open sky, which is called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12120:struck down with so melancholy an error, to resume his own name, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12121:become once more, out of duty, the convict Jean Valjean, that was, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12122:truth, to achieve his resurrection, and to close forever that hell
tests/les_miserables.txt:12123:whence he had just emerged; to fall back there in appearance was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12124:escape from it in reality. This must be done! He had done nothing if he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12125:did not do all this; his whole life was useless; all his penitence was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12128:more because he was dead, that the Bishop was gazing fixedly at him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12129:that henceforth Mayor Madeleine, with all his virtues, would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:12130:abominable to him, and that the convict Jean Valjean would be pure and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12132:saw his face; that men saw his life, but that the Bishop beheld his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12133:conscience. So he must go to Arras, deliver the false Jean Valjean, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12134:denounce the real one. Alas! that was the greatest of sacrifices, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12135:most poignant of victories, the last step to take; but it must be done.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12136:Sad fate! he would enter into sanctity only in the eyes of God when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12139:“Well,” said he, “let us decide upon this; let us do our duty; let us
tests/les_miserables.txt:12140:save this man.” He uttered these words aloud, without perceiving that
tests/les_miserables.txt:12144:the fire a bundle of bills which he had against petty and embarrassed
tests/les_miserables.txt:12146:have been read, had there been any one in his chamber at the moment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12148:secretary a pocket-book which contained several bank-notes and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12149:passport of which he had made use that same year when he went to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12150:elections.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12152:Any one who had seen him during the execution of these various acts,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12153:into which there entered such grave thought, would have had no
tests/les_miserables.txt:12154:suspicion of what was going on within him. Only occasionally did his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12157:which he wished to elucidate or interrogate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12160:pocket, together with the pocket-book, and began his walk once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12162:His reverie had not swerved from its course. He continued to see his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12163:duty clearly, written in luminous letters, which flamed before his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:12164:and changed its place as he altered the direction of his glance:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:12166:_“Go! Tell your name! Denounce yourself!”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:12169:visible forms, the two ideas which had, up to that time, formed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12170:double rule of his soul,—the concealment of his name, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12171:sanctification of his life. For the first time they appeared to him as
tests/les_miserables.txt:12172:absolutely distinct, and he perceived the distance which separated
tests/les_miserables.txt:12173:them. He recognized the fact that one of these ideas was, necessarily,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12174:good, while the other might become bad; that the first was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12179:They were antagonistic. He saw them in conflict. In proportion as he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12181:attained colossal statures, and it seemed to him that he beheld within
tests/les_miserables.txt:12182:himself, in that infinity of which we were recently speaking, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12183:midst of the darkness and the lights, a goddess and a giant contending.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12188:He felt that he was on the brink of the second decisive crisis of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12189:conscience and of his destiny; that the Bishop had marked the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:12190:phase of his new life, and that Champmathieu marked the second. After
tests/les_miserables.txt:12191:the grand crisis, the grand test.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12194:him. A thousand thoughts traversed his mind, but they continued to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12199:that he had actually been guilty of theft.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12205:the attorneys for the Crown always proceed in this manner? He is
tests/les_miserables.txt:12206:supposed to be a thief because he is known to be a convict.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12209:In another instant the thought had occurred to him that, when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12210:denounced himself, the heroism of his deed might, perhaps, be taken
tests/les_miserables.txt:12211:into consideration, and his honest life for the last seven years, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12212:what he had done for the district, and that they would have mercy on
tests/les_miserables.txt:12215:But this supposition vanished very quickly, and he smiled bitterly as
tests/les_miserables.txt:12217:him in the position of a man guilty of a second offence after
tests/les_miserables.txt:12218:conviction, that this affair would certainly come up, and, according to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12219:the precise terms of the law, would render him liable to penal
tests/les_miserables.txt:12222:He turned aside from all illusions, detached himself more and more from
tests/les_miserables.txt:12223:earth, and sought strength and consolation elsewhere. He told himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:12226:things to take their own course_, if he remained at M. sur M., his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12227:consideration, his good name, his good works, the deference and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12228:veneration paid to him, his charity, his wealth, his popularity, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12229:virtue, would be seasoned with a crime. And what would be the taste of
tests/les_miserables.txt:12231:he accomplished his sacrifice, a celestial idea would be mingled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:12232:the galleys, the post, the iron necklet, the green cap, unceasing toil,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12237:high, that, in any case, he must make his choice: virtue without and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12240:The stirring up of these lugubrious ideas did not cause his courage to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12244:The veins in his temples throbbed violently; he still paced to and fro;
tests/les_miserables.txt:12245:midnight sounded first from the parish church, then from the town-hall;
tests/les_miserables.txt:12246:he counted the twelve strokes of the two clocks, and compared the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12247:sounds of the two bells; he recalled in this connection the fact that,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12248:a few days previously, he had seen in an ironmonger’s shop an ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:12249:clock for sale, upon which was written the name, _Antoine-Albin de
tests/les_miserables.txt:12252:He was cold; he lighted a small fire; it did not occur to him to close
tests/les_miserables.txt:12256:a tolerably vigorous effort to recall what had been the subject of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12257:thoughts before midnight had struck; he finally succeeded in doing
tests/les_miserables.txt:12269:Here a fresh crisis declared itself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12271:Fantine, by appearing thus abruptly in his reverie, produced the effect
tests/les_miserables.txt:12272:of an unexpected ray of light; it seemed to him as though everything
tests/les_miserables.txt:12273:about him were undergoing a change of aspect: he exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:12275:“Ah! but I have hitherto considered no one but myself; it is proper for
tests/les_miserables.txt:12276:me to hold my tongue or to denounce myself, to conceal my person or to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12277:save my soul, to be a despicable and respected magistrate, or an
tests/les_miserables.txt:12278:infamous and venerable convict; it is I, it is always I and nothing but
tests/les_miserables.txt:12281:little about others? The highest holiness is to think of others; come,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12282:let us examine the matter. The _I_ excepted, the _I_ effaced, the _I_
tests/les_miserables.txt:12283:forgotten, what would be the result of all this? What if I denounce
tests/les_miserables.txt:12284:myself? I am arrested; this Champmathieu is released; I am put back in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12286:here is a country, a town, here are factories, an industry, workers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12287:both men and women, aged grandsires, children, poor people! All this I
tests/les_miserables.txt:12288:have created; all these I provide with their living; everywhere where
tests/les_miserables.txt:12289:there is a smoking chimney, it is I who have placed the brand on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12290:hearth and meat in the pot; I have created ease, circulation, credit;
tests/les_miserables.txt:12292:life, fecundated, stimulated, enriched the whole country-side; lacking
tests/les_miserables.txt:12293:me, the soul is lacking; I take myself off, everything dies: and this
tests/les_miserables.txt:12294:woman, who has suffered so much, who possesses so many merits in spite
tests/les_miserables.txt:12295:of her fall; the cause of all whose misery I have unwittingly been! And
tests/les_miserables.txt:12296:that child whom I meant to go in search of, whom I have promised to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:12298:the evil which I have done her? If I disappear, what happens? The
tests/les_miserables.txt:12299:mother dies; the child becomes what it can; that is what will take
tests/les_miserables.txt:12300:place, if I denounce myself. If I do not denounce myself? come, let us
tests/les_miserables.txt:12301:see how it will be if I do not denounce myself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12306:he answered himself calmly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:12309:deuce! he has stolen! There is no use in my saying that he has not been
tests/les_miserables.txt:12311:shall have made ten millions; I scatter them over the country; I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:12314:aroused and animated; factories and shops are multiplied; families, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12315:hundred families, a thousand families, are happy; the district becomes
tests/les_miserables.txt:12317:rise where there was nothing; wretchedness disappears, and with
tests/les_miserables.txt:12318:wretchedness debauchery, prostitution, theft, murder; all vices
tests/les_miserables.txt:12319:disappear, all crimes: and this poor mother rears her child; and behold
tests/les_miserables.txt:12320:a whole country rich and honest! Ah! I was a fool! I was absurd! what
tests/les_miserables.txt:12321:was that I was saying about denouncing myself? I really must pay
tests/les_miserables.txt:12322:attention and not be precipitate about anything. What! because it would
tests/les_miserables.txt:12324:after all; because I should have thought of no one but myself, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12327:good-for-nothing, evidently, a whole country-side must perish! a poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:12330:having seen her child once more, almost without the child’s having
tests/les_miserables.txt:12331:known her mother; and all that for the sake of an old wretch of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:12333:else, if not for that; fine scruples, indeed, which save a guilty man
tests/les_miserables.txt:12334:and sacrifice the innocent, which save an old vagabond who has only a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12336:galleys than in his hovel, and which sacrifice a whole population,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12337:mothers, wives, children. This poor little Cosette who has no one in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12338:the world but me, and who is, no doubt, blue with cold at this moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:12339:in the den of those Thénardiers; those peoples are rascals; and I was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12340:going to neglect my duty towards all these poor creatures; and I was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12341:going off to denounce myself; and I was about to commit that
tests/les_miserables.txt:12343:wrong action on my part in this, and that my conscience will reproach
tests/les_miserables.txt:12344:me for it some day, to accept, for the good of others, these reproaches
tests/les_miserables.txt:12345:which weigh only on myself; this evil action which compromises my soul
tests/les_miserables.txt:12346:alone; in that lies self-sacrifice; in that alone there is virtue.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12349:He rose and resumed his march; this time, he seemed to be content.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12351:Diamonds are found only in the dark places of the earth; truths are
tests/les_miserables.txt:12353:having descended into these depths, after having long groped among the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12360:let things take their course; let us no longer vacillate; let us no
tests/les_miserables.txt:12361:longer hang back; this is for the interest of all, not for my own; I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:12365:him look out for himself; that does not concern me; it is a fatal name
tests/les_miserables.txt:12366:which was floating abroad in the night; if it halts and descends on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12367:head, so much the worse for that head.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12370:He looked into the little mirror which hung above his chimney-piece,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12373:“Hold! it has relieved me to come to a decision; I am quite another man
tests/les_miserables.txt:12377:He proceeded a few paces further, then he stopped short.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12379:“Come!” he said, “I must not flinch before any of the consequences of
tests/les_miserables.txt:12380:the resolution which I have once adopted; there are still threads which
tests/les_miserables.txt:12381:attach me to that Jean Valjean; they must be broken; in this very room
tests/les_miserables.txt:12382:there are objects which would betray me, dumb things which would bear
tests/les_miserables.txt:12386:He fumbled in his pocket, drew out his purse, opened it, and took out a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12387:small key; he inserted the key in a lock whose aperture could hardly be
tests/les_miserables.txt:12388:seen, so hidden was it in the most sombre tones of the design which
tests/les_miserables.txt:12389:covered the wall-paper; a secret receptacle opened, a sort of false
tests/les_miserables.txt:12390:cupboard constructed in the angle between the wall and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12391:chimney-piece; in this hiding-place there were some rags—a blue linen
tests/les_miserables.txt:12392:blouse, an old pair of trousers, an old knapsack, and a huge thorn
tests/les_miserables.txt:12393:cudgel shod with iron at both ends. Those who had seen Jean Valjean at
tests/les_miserables.txt:12394:the epoch when he passed through D—— in October, 1815, could easily
tests/les_miserables.txt:12395:have recognized all the pieces of this miserable outfit.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12397:He had preserved them as he had preserved the silver candlesticks, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12398:order to remind himself continually of his starting-point, but he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:12399:concealed all that came from the galleys, and he had allowed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12400:candlesticks which came from the Bishop to be seen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12402:He cast a furtive glance towards the door, as though he feared that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:12403:would open in spite of the bolt which fastened it; then, with a quick
tests/les_miserables.txt:12404:and abrupt movement, he took the whole in his arms at once, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:12405:bestowing so much as a glance on the things which he had so religiously
tests/les_miserables.txt:12407:rags, cudgel, knapsack, into the fire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12409:[Illustration: Candlesticks Into the Fire]
tests/les_miserables.txt:12411:He closed the false cupboard again, and with redoubled precautions,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12412:henceforth unnecessary, since it was now empty, he concealed the door
tests/les_miserables.txt:12413:behind a heavy piece of furniture, which he pushed in front of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12415:After the lapse of a few seconds, the room and the opposite wall were
tests/les_miserables.txt:12416:lighted up with a fierce, red, tremulous glow. Everything was on fire;
tests/les_miserables.txt:12417:the thorn cudgel snapped and threw out sparks to the middle of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12418:chamber.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12420:As the knapsack was consumed, together with the hideous rags which it
tests/les_miserables.txt:12421:contained, it revealed something which sparkled in the ashes. By
tests/les_miserables.txt:12422:bending over, one could have readily recognized a coin,—no doubt the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12423:forty-sou piece stolen from the little Savoyard.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12425:He did not look at the fire, but paced back and forth with the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:12428:All at once his eye fell on the two silver candlesticks, which shone
tests/les_miserables.txt:12429:vaguely on the chimney-piece, through the glow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12435:He seized the two candlesticks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12438:and converted into a sort of unrecognizable bar of metal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12441:sense of real comfort. “How good warmth is!” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12443:He stirred the live coals with one of the candlesticks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12447:At that moment it seemed to him that he heard a voice within him
tests/les_miserables.txt:12451:His hair rose upright: he became like a man who is listening to some
tests/les_miserables.txt:12454:“Yes, that’s it! finish!” said the voice. “Complete what you are about!
tests/les_miserables.txt:12455:Destroy these candlesticks! Annihilate this souvenir! Forget the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12459:perhaps, done nothing, an innocent man, whose whole misfortune lies in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12460:your name, upon whom your name weighs like a crime, who is about to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:12461:taken for you, who will be condemned, who will finish his days in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12462:abjectness and horror. That is good! Be an honest man yourself; remain
tests/les_miserables.txt:12463:Monsieur le Maire; remain honorable and honored; enrich the town;
tests/les_miserables.txt:12467:bear your name in ignominy, and who will drag your chain in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12468:galleys. Yes, it is well arranged thus. Ah, wretch!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12472:candlesticks. But that within him which had spoken had not finished.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12473:The voice continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:12475:“Jean Valjean, there will be around you many voices, which will make a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12476:great noise, which will talk very loud, and which will bless you, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12477:only one which no one will hear, and which will curse you in the dark.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12478:Well! listen, infamous man! All those benedictions will fall back
tests/les_miserables.txt:12479:before they reach heaven, and only the malediction will ascend to God.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12482:This voice, feeble at first, and which had proceeded from the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:12483:obscure depths of his conscience, had gradually become startling and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12485:it had detached itself from him, and that it was now speaking outside
tests/les_miserables.txt:12486:of him. He thought that he heard the last words so distinctly, that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12487:glanced around the room in a sort of terror.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12491:Then he resumed, with a laugh which resembled that of an idiot:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:12493:“How stupid I am! There can be no one!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12497:human eye cannot see.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12499:He placed the candlesticks on the chimney-piece.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12501:Then he resumed his monotonous and lugubrious tramp, which troubled the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12504:This tramping to and fro soothed and at the same time intoxicated him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12505:It sometimes seems, on supreme occasions, as though people moved about
tests/les_miserables.txt:12506:for the purpose of asking advice of everything that they may encounter
tests/les_miserables.txt:12507:by change of place. After the lapse of a few minutes he no longer knew
tests/les_miserables.txt:12510:He now recoiled in equal terror before both the resolutions at which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12511:had arrived in turn. The two ideas which counselled him appeared to him
tests/les_miserables.txt:12512:equally fatal. What a fatality! What conjunction that that Champmathieu
tests/les_miserables.txt:12513:should have been taken for him; to be overwhelmed by precisely the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12514:means which Providence seemed to have employed, at first, to strengthen
tests/les_miserables.txt:12517:There was a moment when he reflected on the future. Denounce himself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12518:great God! Deliver himself up! With immense despair he faced all that
tests/les_miserables.txt:12520:once more. He should have to bid farewell to that existence which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12521:so good, so pure, so radiant, to the respect of all, to honor, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12524:bestow alms on the little children; he should never more experience the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12525:sweetness of having glances of gratitude and love fixed upon him; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12526:should quit that house which he had built, that little chamber!
tests/les_miserables.txt:12527:Everything seemed charming to him at that moment. Never again should he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12530:never more bring him his coffee in the morning. Great God! instead of
tests/les_miserables.txt:12531:that, the convict gang, the iron necklet, the red waistcoat, the chain
tests/les_miserables.txt:12532:on his ankle, fatigue, the cell, the camp bed all those horrors which
tests/les_miserables.txt:12535:one who pleased; to be searched by the convict-guard; to receive the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12536:galley-sergeant’s cudgellings; to wear iron-bound shoes on his bare
tests/les_miserables.txt:12537:feet; to have to stretch out his leg night and morning to the hammer of
tests/les_miserables.txt:12538:the roundsman who visits the gang; to submit to the curiosity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:12541:perspiration, overwhelmed with lassitude, their green caps drawn over
tests/les_miserables.txt:12542:their eyes, to remount, two by two, the ladder staircase of the galleys
tests/les_miserables.txt:12544:malicious as an intelligent being, and become as monstrous as the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:12547:And do what he would, he always fell back upon the heartrending dilemma
tests/les_miserables.txt:12548:which lay at the foundation of his reverie: “Should he remain in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12549:paradise and become a demon? Should he return to hell and become an
tests/les_miserables.txt:12555:The torment from which he had escaped with so much difficulty was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12556:unchained afresh within him. His ideas began to grow confused once
tests/les_miserables.txt:12557:more; they assumed a kind of stupefied and mechanical quality which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:12558:peculiar to despair. The name of Romainville recurred incessantly to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12559:his mind, with the two verses of a song which he had heard in the past.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12561:lovers go to pluck lilacs in the month of April.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12563:He wavered outwardly as well as inwardly. He walked like a little child
tests/les_miserables.txt:12566:At intervals, as he combated his lassitude, he made an effort to
tests/les_miserables.txt:12567:recover the mastery of his mind. He tried to put to himself, for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12568:last time, and definitely, the problem over which he had, in a manner,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12569:fallen prostrate with fatigue: Ought he to denounce himself? Ought he
tests/les_miserables.txt:12570:to hold his peace? He could not manage to see anything distinctly. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:12571:vague aspects of all the courses of reasoning which had been sketched
tests/les_miserables.txt:12573:smoke. He only felt that, to whatever course of action he made up his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12574:mind, something in him must die, and that of necessity, and without his
tests/les_miserables.txt:12575:being able to escape the fact; that he was entering a sepulchre on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12576:right hand as much as on the left; that he was passing through a death
tests/les_miserables.txt:12580:further advanced than at the beginning.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12584:summed up all the sanctities and all the sufferings of humanity had
tests/les_miserables.txt:12586:the wild wind of the infinite, the terrible cup which appeared to Him
tests/les_miserables.txt:12596:Three o’clock in the morning had just struck, and he had been walking
tests/les_miserables.txt:12598:himself to drop into his chair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12603:situation, except by its painful and heart-rending character, but it
tests/les_miserables.txt:12604:made an impression on him. This nightmare struck him so forcibly that
tests/les_miserables.txt:12606:handwriting which he has bequeathed to us. We think that we have here
tests/les_miserables.txt:12607:reproduced the thing in strict accordance with the text.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12610:be incomplete if we were to omit it: it is the gloomy adventure of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:12613:Here it is. On the envelope we find this line inscribed, “The Dream I
tests/les_miserables.txt:12620:“I was walking with my brother, the brother of my childish years, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12624:“We were conversing and we met some passers-by. We were talking of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12626:open from the time when she came to live on the street. As we talked we
tests/les_miserables.txt:12627:felt cold because of that open window.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12629:“There were no trees in the plain. We saw a man passing close to us. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:12630:was entirely nude, of the hue of ashes, and mounted on a horse which
tests/les_miserables.txt:12631:was earth color. The man had no hair; we could see his skull and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12632:veins on it. In his hand he held a switch which was as supple as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12639:a spear of moss. Everything was dirt-colored, even the sky. After
tests/les_miserables.txt:12640:proceeding a few paces, I received no reply when I spoke: I perceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:12643:“I entered a village which I espied. I reflected that it must be
tests/les_miserables.txt:12646:“The first street that I entered was deserted. I entered a second
tests/les_miserables.txt:12648:erect against the wall. I said to this man:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:12650:“‘What country is this? Where am I?’ The man made no reply. I saw the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12653:“The first chamber was deserted. I entered the second. Behind the door
tests/les_miserables.txt:12654:of this chamber a man was standing erect against the wall. I inquired
tests/les_miserables.txt:12662:“I strolled into the village, and perceived that it was a town. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12664:being was passing in the streets, walking through the chambers or
tests/les_miserables.txt:12665:strolling in the gardens. But behind each angle of the walls, behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:12666:each door, behind each tree, stood a silent man. Only one was to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:12667:seen at a time. These men watched me pass.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12671:“After the lapse of some time I turned back and saw a great crowd
tests/les_miserables.txt:12672:coming up behind me. I recognized all the men whom I had seen in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:12675:instant this crowd had overtaken and surrounded me. The faces of these
tests/les_miserables.txt:12684:“I opened my mouth to reply, and I perceived that there was no one near
tests/les_miserables.txt:12688:He woke. He was icy cold. A wind which was chill like the breeze of
tests/les_miserables.txt:12689:dawn was rattling the leaves of the window, which had been left open on
tests/les_miserables.txt:12690:their hinges. The fire was out. The candle was nearing its end. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12691:still black night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12697:sharp, harsh noise, which made him drop his eyes, resounded from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12700:Below him he perceived two red stars, whose rays lengthened and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12707:But this confusion vanished; a second sound similar to the first roused
tests/les_miserables.txt:12708:him thoroughly; he looked and recognized the fact that these two stars
tests/les_miserables.txt:12709:were the lanterns of a carriage. By the light which they cast he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12710:able to distinguish the form of this vehicle. It was a tilbury
tests/les_miserables.txt:12711:harnessed to a small white horse. The noise which he had heard was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12714:“What vehicle is this?” he said to himself. “Who is coming here so
tests/les_miserables.txt:12718:At that moment there came a light tap on the door of his chamber.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12720:He shuddered from head to foot, and cried in a terrible voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:12730:He recognized the voice of the old woman who was his portress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12735:“Monsieur le Maire, it is just five o’clock in the morning.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12741:“The cabriolet is here, Monsieur le Maire.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12744:“What cabriolet?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12758:“The coachman says that he has come for Monsieur le Maire.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12761:“What coachman?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12764:“M. Scaufflaire’s coachman.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12767:“M. Scaufflaire?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12771:passed in front of his face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12773:“Ah! yes,” he resumed; “M. Scaufflaire!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12776:If the old woman could have seen him at that moment, she would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:12779:A tolerably long silence ensued. He examined the flame of the candle
tests/les_miserables.txt:12780:with a stupid air, and from around the wick he took some of the burning
tests/les_miserables.txt:12781:wax, which he rolled between his fingers. The old woman waited for him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12782:She even ventured to uplift her voice once more:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:12787:“Say that it is well, and that I am coming down.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12796:The posting service from Arras to M. sur M. was still operated at this
tests/les_miserables.txt:12798:mail-wagons were two-wheeled cabriolets, upholstered inside with
tests/les_miserables.txt:12799:fawn-colored leather, hung on springs, and having but two seats, one
tests/les_miserables.txt:12801:with those long, offensive axles which keep other vehicles at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12802:distance, and which may still be seen on the road in Germany. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:12803:despatch box, an immense oblong coffer, was placed behind the vehicle
tests/les_miserables.txt:12804:and formed a part of it. This coffer was painted black, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12805:cabriolet yellow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12807:These vehicles, which have no counterparts nowadays, had something
tests/les_miserables.txt:12808:distorted and hunchbacked about them; and when one saw them passing in
tests/les_miserables.txt:12809:the distance, and climbing up some road to the horizon, they resembled
tests/les_miserables.txt:12810:the insects which are called, I think, termites, and which, though with
tests/les_miserables.txt:12811:but little corselet, drag a great train behind them. But they travelled
tests/les_miserables.txt:12812:at a very rapid rate. The post-wagon which set out from Arras at one
tests/les_miserables.txt:12813:o’clock every night, after the mail from Paris had passed, arrived at
tests/les_miserables.txt:12814:M. sur M. a little before five o’clock in the morning.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12816:That night the wagon which was descending to M. sur M. by the Hesdin
tests/les_miserables.txt:12817:road, collided at the corner of a street, just as it was entering the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12818:town, with a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse, which was going
tests/les_miserables.txt:12819:in the opposite direction, and in which there was but one person, a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:12820:enveloped in a mantle. The wheel of the tilbury received quite a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12821:violent shock. The postman shouted to the man to stop, but the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12827:in convulsions which are certainly deserving of pity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12829:Whither was he going? He could not have told. Why was he hastening? He
tests/les_miserables.txt:12832:times he was conscious of it, and he shuddered. He plunged into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12834:on. No one could have told what was taking place within him; every one
tests/les_miserables.txt:12836:once in his life, into that obscure cavern of the unknown?
tests/les_miserables.txt:12838:However, he had resolved on nothing, decided nothing, formed no plan,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12839:done nothing. None of the actions of his conscience had been decisive.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12845:Scaufflaire’s cabriolet: that, whatever the result was to be, there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:12848:place; that no decision could be arrived at without having observed and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12849:scrutinized; that one made mountains out of everything from a distance;
tests/les_miserables.txt:12851:wretch, his conscience would probably be greatly relieved to allow him
tests/les_miserables.txt:12853:and that Brevet, that Chenildieu, that Cochepaille, old convicts who
tests/les_miserables.txt:12854:had known him; but they certainly would not recognize him;—bah! what an
tests/les_miserables.txt:12855:idea! that Javert was a hundred leagues from suspecting the truth; that
tests/les_miserables.txt:12856:all conjectures and all suppositions were fixed on Champmathieu, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:12857:that there is nothing so headstrong as suppositions and conjectures;
tests/les_miserables.txt:12858:that accordingly there was no danger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12862:his own hand; that he was master of it. He clung to this thought.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12869:As he meditated, he whipped up his horse, which was proceeding at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:12870:fine, regular, and even trot which accomplishes two leagues and a half
tests/les_miserables.txt:12873:In proportion as the cabriolet advanced, he felt something within him
tests/les_miserables.txt:12874:draw back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12876:At daybreak he was in the open country; the town of M. sur M. lay far
tests/les_miserables.txt:12877:behind him. He watched the horizon grow white; he stared at all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12878:chilly figures of a winter’s dawn as they passed before his eyes, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:12879:without seeing them. The morning has its spectres as well as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12881:means of a sort of penetration which was almost physical, these black
tests/les_miserables.txt:12885:Each time that he passed one of those isolated dwellings which
tests/les_miserables.txt:12891:road, produced a gentle, monotonous noise. These things are charming
tests/les_miserables.txt:12898:The horse belonged, as Scaufflaire had said, to that small race of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:12899:Boulonnais, which has too much head, too much belly, and not enough
tests/les_miserables.txt:12900:neck and shoulders, but which has a broad chest, a large crupper, thin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:12901:fine legs, and solid hoofs—a homely, but a robust and healthy race. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:12902:excellent beast had travelled five leagues in two hours, and had not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12908:“Are you going far in this condition?” said the man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12915:“Have you come from a great distance?” went on the man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:12926:The man bent down once more, was silent for a moment, with his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:12927:fixed on the wheel; then he rose erect and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:12929:“Because, though this wheel has travelled five leagues, it certainly
tests/les_miserables.txt:12938:“I say that it is a miracle that you should have travelled five leagues
tests/les_miserables.txt:12939:without you and your horse rolling into some ditch on the highway. Just
tests/les_miserables.txt:12943:The wheel really had suffered serious damage. The shock administered by
tests/les_miserables.txt:12953:“Do me the service to go and fetch him.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:12960:threshold. He came, examined the wheel and made a grimace like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12969:“When can I set out again?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13000:“The matter cannot wait until to-morrow. What if you were to replace
tests/les_miserables.txt:13013:“Have you not a wheel that you can sell me? Then I could start again at
tests/les_miserables.txt:13014:once.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13023:“I have no wheel on hand that would fit your cabriolet. Two wheels make
tests/les_miserables.txt:13024:a pair. Two wheels cannot be put together hap-hazard.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13027:“In that case, sell me a pair of wheels.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13036:“It is useless, sir. I have nothing to sell but cart-wheels. We are but
tests/les_miserables.txt:13037:a poor country here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13040:“Have you a cabriolet that you can let me have?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13043:The wheelwright had seen at the first glance that the tilbury was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13044:hired vehicle. He shrugged his shoulders.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13046:“You treat the cabriolets that people let you so well! If I had one, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:13056:“What! not even a spring-cart? I am not hard to please, as you see.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13059:“We live in a poor country. There is, in truth,” added the wheelwright,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13060:“an old calash under the shed yonder, which belongs to a bourgeois of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13061:the town, who gave it to me to take care of, and who only uses it on
tests/les_miserables.txt:13064:pass—and then, it is a calash; it would require two horses.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13076:“And Monsieur wishes to reach there to-day?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13079:“Yes, of course.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13088:“Does it make any difference whether Monsieur arrives at four o’clock
tests/les_miserables.txt:13102:“Well, by taking post-horses, Monsieur cannot reach Arras before
tests/les_miserables.txt:13103:to-morrow. We are on a crossroad. The relays are badly served, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13108:There are many hills to ascend.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13111:“Come then, I will go on horseback. Unharness the cabriolet. Some one
tests/les_miserables.txt:13112:can surely sell me a saddle in the neighborhood.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13124:“But I can surely hire a horse in the village?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13127:“A horse to travel to Arras at one stretch?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13133:“That would require such a horse as does not exist in these parts. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:13134:would have to buy it to begin with, because no one knows you. But you
tests/les_miserables.txt:13135:will not find one for sale nor to let, for five hundred francs, or for
tests/les_miserables.txt:13149:“The deuce!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13152:“Is there not a mail-wagon which runs to Arras? When will it pass?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13156:one coming.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13174:“That could be done with the spokes, not with the hub; and the felly is
tests/les_miserables.txt:13187:The stableman and the wheelwright replied in concert, with a toss of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13195:It was evident that Providence was intervening. That it was it who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:13198:every possible effort to continue the journey; he had loyally and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13199:scrupulously exhausted all means; he had been deterred neither by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13200:season, nor fatigue, nor by the expense; he had nothing with which to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13201:reproach himself. If he went no further, that was no fault of his. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:13202:did not concern him further. It was no longer his fault. It was not the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13203:act of his own conscience, but the act of Providence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13206:lungs for the first time since Javert’s visit. It seemed to him that
tests/les_miserables.txt:13207:the hand of iron which had held his heart in its grasp for the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:13212:He said to himself that he had done all he could, and that now he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:13213:nothing to do but retrace his steps quietly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13215:If his conversation with the wheelwright had taken place in a chamber
tests/les_miserables.txt:13218:not have had to relate any of the occurrences which the reader is about
tests/les_miserables.txt:13219:to peruse; but this conversation had taken place in the street. Any
tests/les_miserables.txt:13220:colloquy in the street inevitably attracts a crowd. There are always
tests/les_miserables.txt:13221:people who ask nothing better than to become spectators. While he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:13222:questioning the wheelwright, some people who were passing back and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13224:lad, to whom no one had paid any heed, detached himself from the group
tests/les_miserables.txt:13227:At the moment when the traveller, after the inward deliberation which
tests/les_miserables.txt:13228:we have just described, resolved to retrace his steps, this child
tests/les_miserables.txt:13229:returned. He was accompanied by an old woman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13232:cabriolet.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13235:These simple words uttered by an old woman led by a child made the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13236:perspiration trickle down his limbs. He thought that he beheld the hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:13237:which had relaxed its grasp reappear in the darkness behind him, ready
tests/les_miserables.txt:13238:to seize him once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13242:“Yes, my good woman; I am in search of a cabriolet which I can hire.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13247:“But there is none in the place.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13258:The old woman really had in her shed a sort of basket spring-cart. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:13259:wheelwright and the stable-man, in despair at the prospect of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13260:traveller escaping their clutches, interfered.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13263:actual fact that the seats were suspended inside it by leather thongs;
tests/les_miserables.txt:13264:the rain came into it; the wheels were rusted and eaten with moisture;
tests/les_miserables.txt:13265:it would not go much further than the tilbury; a regular ramshackle old
tests/les_miserables.txt:13267:himself to it,” etc., etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13269:All this was true; but this trap, this ramshackle old vehicle, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:13270:thing, whatever it was, ran on its two wheels and could go to Arras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13273:repaired, intending to reclaim it on his return, had the white horse
tests/les_miserables.txt:13274:put to the cart, climbed into it, and resumed the road which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:13275:been travelling since morning.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13277:At the moment when the cart moved off, he admitted that he had felt, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13278:moment previously, a certain joy in the thought that he should not go
tests/les_miserables.txt:13279:whither he was now proceeding. He examined this joy with a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13280:wrath, and found it absurd. Why should he feel joy at turning back?
tests/les_miserables.txt:13282:forcing him to it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13284:And assuredly nothing would happen except what he should choose.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13286:As he left Hesdin, he heard a voice shouting to him: “Stop! Stop!” He
tests/les_miserables.txt:13287:halted the cart with a vigorous movement which contained a feverish and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13288:convulsive element resembling hope.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13292:“Monsieur,” said the latter, “it was I who got the cart for you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13304:“Ah! it’s you, you scamp?” said he; “you shall have nothing.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13310:The little horse was courageous, and pulled for two; but it was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13312:it was no longer the tilbury. The cart was very heavy, and in addition,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13313:there were many ascents.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13318:At Saint-Pol he had the horse unharnessed at the first inn he came to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13319:and led to the stable; as he had promised Scaufflaire, he stood beside
tests/les_miserables.txt:13320:the manger while the horse was eating; he thought of sad and confusing
tests/les_miserables.txt:13323:The inn-keeper’s wife came to the stable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13331:He followed the woman, who had a rosy, cheerful face; she led him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13332:the public room where there were tables covered with waxed cloth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13337:A big Flemish servant-maid placed his knife and fork in all haste; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:13338:looked at the girl with a sensation of comfort.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13344:then slowly replaced it on the table, and did not touch it again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13346:A carter was eating at another table; he said to this man:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:13351:The carter was a German and did not understand him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13355:An hour later he had quitted Saint-Pol and was directing his course
tests/les_miserables.txt:13356:towards Tinques, which is only five leagues from Arras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13359:morning, he watched the trees, the thatched roofs, the tilled fields
tests/les_miserables.txt:13360:pass by, and the way in which the landscape, broken at every turn of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13361:the road, vanished; this is a sort of contemplation which sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:13362:suffices to the soul, and almost relieves it from thought. What is more
tests/les_miserables.txt:13363:melancholy and more profound than to see a thousand objects for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13366:comparisons between the shifting horizon and our human existence: all
tests/les_miserables.txt:13368:bright intervals are intermingled; after a dazzling moment, an eclipse;
tests/les_miserables.txt:13369:we look, we hasten, we stretch out our hands to grasp what is passing;
tests/les_miserables.txt:13370:each event is a turn in the road, and, all at once, we are old; we feel
tests/les_miserables.txt:13371:a shock; all is black; we distinguish an obscure door; the gloomy horse
tests/les_miserables.txt:13372:of life, which has been drawing us halts, and we see a veiled and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13375:Twilight was falling when the children who were coming out of school
tests/les_miserables.txt:13381:“That horse is very much fatigued.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13384:The poor beast was, in fact, going at a walk.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13407:there is no way to proceed further.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13413:“You will take the road on the left, leading to Carency; you will cross
tests/les_miserables.txt:13414:the river; when you reach Camblin, you will turn to the right; that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:13415:the road to Mont-Saint-Éloy which leads to Arras.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13427:“And, besides, it is all crossroads; stop! sir,” resumed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13428:road-mender; “shall I give you a piece of advice? your horse is tired;
tests/les_miserables.txt:13429:return to Tinques; there is a good inn there; sleep there; you can
tests/les_miserables.txt:13430:reach Arras to-morrow.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13437:horse; the stable-boy will guide you through the crossroads.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13440:He followed the road-mender’s advice, retraced his steps, and, half an
tests/les_miserables.txt:13442:with a good horse to aid; a stable-boy, who called himself a postilion,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13443:was seated on the shaft of the cariole.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13447:Night had fully come.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13449:They turned into the crossroad; the way became frightfully bad; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13450:cart lurched from one rut to the other; he said to the postilion:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:13459:you wish to return and sleep at Tinques, we could be in Arras early
tests/les_miserables.txt:13469:He cut a branch from a tree and made a whiffle-tree of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13471:This caused another loss of twenty minutes; but they set out again at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13474:The plain was gloomy; low-hanging, black, crisp fogs crept over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13475:hills and wrenched themselves away like smoke: there were whitish
tests/les_miserables.txt:13476:gleams in the clouds; a strong breeze which blew in from the sea
tests/les_miserables.txt:13477:produced a sound in all quarters of the horizon, as of some one moving
tests/les_miserables.txt:13478:furniture; everything that could be seen assumed attitudes of terror.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13481:He was stiff with cold; he had eaten nothing since the night before; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:13482:vaguely recalled his other nocturnal trip in the vast plain in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13486:The hour struck from a distant tower; he asked the boy:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:13491:“Seven o’clock, sir; we shall reach Arras at eight; we have but three
tests/les_miserables.txt:13495:At that moment, he for the first time indulged in this reflection,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13496:thinking it odd the while that it had not occurred to him sooner: that
tests/les_miserables.txt:13497:all this trouble which he was taking was, perhaps, useless; that he did
tests/les_miserables.txt:13498:not know so much as the hour of the trial; that he should, at least,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13500:ahead without knowing whether he would be of any service or not; then
tests/les_miserables.txt:13501:he sketched out some calculations in his mind: that, ordinarily, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13502:sittings of the Court of Assizes began at nine o’clock in the morning;
tests/les_miserables.txt:13503:that it could not be a long affair; that the theft of the apples would
tests/les_miserables.txt:13508:The postilion whipped up the horses; they had crossed the river and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13521:She had passed a very bad night; her cough was frightful; her fever had
tests/les_miserables.txt:13523:doctor paid his visit, she was delirious; he assumed an alarmed look,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13526:All the morning she was melancholy, said but little, and laid plaits in
tests/les_miserables.txt:13527:her sheets, murmuring the while, in a low voice, calculations which
tests/les_miserables.txt:13528:seemed to be calculations of distances. Her eyes were hollow and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13530:again and shone like stars. It seems as though, at the approach of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13531:certain dark hour, the light of heaven fills those who are quitting the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13534:Each time that Sister Simplice asked her how she felt, she replied
tests/les_miserables.txt:13540:herself; now she was the spectre of herself. Physical suffering had
tests/les_miserables.txt:13541:completed the work of moral suffering. This creature of five and twenty
tests/les_miserables.txt:13542:had a wrinkled brow, flabby cheeks, pinched nostrils, teeth from which
tests/les_miserables.txt:13543:the gums had receded, a leaden complexion, a bony neck, prominent
tests/les_miserables.txt:13544:shoulder-blades, frail limbs, a clayey skin, and her golden hair was
tests/les_miserables.txt:13547:At midday the physician returned, gave some directions, inquired
tests/les_miserables.txt:13548:whether the mayor had made his appearance at the infirmary, and shook
tests/les_miserables.txt:13551:M. Madeleine usually came to see the invalid at three o’clock. As
tests/les_miserables.txt:13552:exactness is kindness, he was exact.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13554:About half-past two, Fantine began to be restless. In the course of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13559:Three o’clock struck. At the third stroke, Fantine sat up in bed; she
tests/les_miserables.txt:13560:who could, in general, hardly turn over, joined her yellow, fleshless
tests/les_miserables.txt:13561:hands in a sort of convulsive clasp, and the nun heard her utter one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13562:those profound sighs which seem to throw off dejection. Then Fantine
tests/les_miserables.txt:13569:not speak to her. The clock struck a quarter past three. Fantine fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:13570:back on her pillow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13572:She said nothing, but began to plait the sheets once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13574:Half an hour passed, then an hour, no one came; every time the clock
tests/les_miserables.txt:13575:struck, Fantine started up and looked towards the door, then fell back
tests/les_miserables.txt:13578:Her thought was clearly perceptible, but she uttered no name, she made
tests/les_miserables.txt:13579:no complaint, she blamed no one. But she coughed in a melancholy way.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13580:One would have said that something dark was descending upon her. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:13583:Five o’clock struck. Then the sister heard her say, very low and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13584:gently, “He is wrong not to come to-day, since I am going away
tests/les_miserables.txt:13588:Sister Simplice herself was surprised at M. Madeleine’s delay.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13591:seemed to be endeavoring to recall something. All at once she began to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13592:sing in a voice as feeble as a breath. The nun listened. This is what
tests/les_miserables.txt:13597:Roses are pink, corn-flowers are blue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13598:I love my love, corn-flowers are blue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13601:“Yestere’en the Virgin Mary came near my stove, in a broidered mantle
tests/les_miserables.txt:13602:clad, and said to me, ‘Here, hide ’neath my veil the child whom you one
tests/les_miserables.txt:13603:day begged from me. Haste to the city, buy linen, buy a needle, buy
tests/les_miserables.txt:13610:“Dear Holy Virgin, beside my stove I have set a cradle with ribbons
tests/les_miserables.txt:13611:decked. God may give me his loveliest star; I prefer the child thou
tests/les_miserables.txt:13613:of it clothes for thy new-born babe.’
tests/les_miserables.txt:13615:“Roses are pink and corn-flowers are blue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13616:I love my love, and corn-flowers are blue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13620:spoiling not, a petticoat fair with its bodice fine, which I will
tests/les_miserables.txt:13621:embroider and fill with flowers.’—‘Madame, the child is no longer here;
tests/les_miserables.txt:13622:what is to be done?’—‘Then make of it a winding-sheet in which to bury
tests/les_miserables.txt:13627:Roses are pink, corn-flowers are blue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13628:I love my love, corn-flowers are blue.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13631:This song was an old cradle romance with which she had, in former days,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13632:lulled her little Cosette to sleep, and which had never recurred to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:13633:mind in all the five years during which she had been parted from her
tests/les_miserables.txt:13634:child. She sang it in so sad a voice, and to so sweet an air, that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:13635:was enough to make any one, even a nun, weep. The sister, accustomed as
tests/les_miserables.txt:13638:The clock struck six. Fantine did not seem to hear it. She no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:13641:Sister Simplice sent a serving-maid to inquire of the portress of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13642:factory, whether the mayor had returned, and if he would not come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13647:The servant informed Sister Simplice in a very low tone, that the mayor
tests/les_miserables.txt:13648:had set out that morning before six o’clock, in a little tilbury
tests/les_miserables.txt:13649:harnessed to a white horse, cold as the weather was; that he had gone
tests/les_miserables.txt:13654:told the portress not to expect him that night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13656:While the two women were whispering together, with their backs turned
tests/les_miserables.txt:13657:to Fantine’s bed, the sister interrogating, the servant conjecturing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13658:Fantine, with the feverish vivacity of certain organic maladies, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:13659:unite the free movements of health with the frightful emaciation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13662:of the curtains, and was listening. All at once she cried:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:13665:he doing? Why does he not come?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13668:Her voice was so abrupt and hoarse that the two women thought they
tests/les_miserables.txt:13669:heard the voice of a man; they wheeled round in affright.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13671:“Answer me!” cried Fantine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13675:“The portress told me that he could not come to-day.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13678:“Be calm, my child,” said the sister; “lie down again.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13681:Fantine, without changing her attitude, continued in a loud voice, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13682:with an accent that was both imperious and heart-rending:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:13684:“He cannot come? Why not? You know the reason. You are whispering it to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13685:each other there. I want to know it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13689:with the city council.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13692:Sister Simplice blushed faintly, for it was a lie that the maid had
tests/les_miserables.txt:13695:On the other hand, it seemed to her that the mere communication of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13698:flush did not last long; the sister raised her calm, sad eyes to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13702:Fantine raised herself and crouched on her heels in the bed: her eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:13703:sparkled; indescribable joy beamed from that melancholy face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13705:“Gone!” she cried; “he has gone to get Cosette.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13708:Then she raised her arms to heaven, and her white face became
tests/les_miserables.txt:13709:ineffable; her lips moved; she was praying in a low voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13719:She lay down again, with the nun’s assistance, helped the nun to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13720:arrange her pillow, and kissed the little silver cross which she wore
tests/les_miserables.txt:13721:on her neck, and which Sister Simplice had given her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13723:“My child,” said the sister, “try to rest now, and do not talk any
tests/les_miserables.txt:13730:“He set out this morning for Paris; in fact, he need not even go
tests/les_miserables.txt:13731:through Paris; Montfermeil is a little to the left as you come thence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13734:made me sign a letter so that she could be taken from the Thénardiers;
tests/les_miserables.txt:13735:they cannot say anything, can they? they will give back Cosette, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:13737:child since they have received their pay. Do not make signs to me that
tests/les_miserables.txt:13740:quite hungry; it is nearly five years since I saw her last; you cannot
tests/les_miserables.txt:13741:imagine how much attached one gets to children, and then, she will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:13743:fingers she had! In the first place, she will have very beautiful
tests/les_miserables.txt:13744:hands; she had ridiculous hands when she was only a year old; like
tests/les_miserables.txt:13746:a young lady; I call her Cosette, but her name is really Euphrasie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13747:Stop! this morning I was looking at the dust on the chimney-piece, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13748:I had a sort of idea come across me, like that, that I should see
tests/les_miserables.txt:13749:Cosette again soon. Mon Dieu! how wrong it is not to see one’s children
tests/les_miserables.txt:13750:for years! One ought to reflect that life is not eternal. Oh, how good
tests/les_miserables.txt:13751:M. le Maire is to go! it is very cold! it is true; he had on his cloak,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13754:my little cap that has lace on it. What a place that Montfermeil is! I
tests/les_miserables.txt:13755:took that journey on foot once; it was very long for me, but the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13756:diligences go very quickly! he will be here to-morrow with Cosette: how
tests/les_miserables.txt:13760:The sister, who had no idea of distances, replied, “Oh, I think that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:13766:mad; I could dance if any one wished it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13770:have understood the change; she was all rosy now; she spoke in a lively
tests/les_miserables.txt:13771:and natural voice; her whole face was one smile; now and then she
tests/les_miserables.txt:13778:Fantine laid her head on her pillow and said in a low voice: “Yes, lie
tests/les_miserables.txt:13779:down again; be good, for you are going to have your child; Sister
tests/les_miserables.txt:13780:Simplice is right; every one here is right.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13787:The sister drew the curtains together again, hoping that she would fall
tests/les_miserables.txt:13788:into a doze. Between seven and eight o’clock the doctor came; not
tests/les_miserables.txt:13790:approached the bed on tiptoe; he opened the curtains a little, and, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:13797:The doctor thought that she was delirious. She added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:13802:The doctor took Sister Simplice aside, and she explained matters to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13804:doubt they had not thought it well to undeceive the invalid, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:13806:after all, that her guess was correct: the doctor approved.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13811:morning to her, poor kitten, and when I cannot sleep at night, I can
tests/les_miserables.txt:13815:“Give me your hand,” said the doctor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13817:She stretched out her arm, and exclaimed with a laugh:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:13819:“Ah, hold! in truth, you did not know it; I am cured; Cosette will
tests/les_miserables.txt:13823:The doctor was surprised; she was better; the pressure on her chest had
tests/les_miserables.txt:13824:decreased; her pulse had regained its strength; a sort of life had
tests/les_miserables.txt:13825:suddenly supervened and reanimated this poor, worn-out creature.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13827:“Doctor,” she went on, “did the sister tell you that M. le Maire has
tests/les_miserables.txt:13828:gone to get that mite of a child?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13831:The doctor recommended silence, and that all painful emotions should be
tests/les_miserables.txt:13832:avoided; he prescribed an infusion of pure chinchona, and, in case the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13833:fever should increase again during the night, a calming potion. As he
tests/les_miserables.txt:13836:“She is doing better; if good luck willed that the mayor should
tests/les_miserables.txt:13837:actually arrive to-morrow with the child, who knows? there are crises
tests/les_miserables.txt:13839:that this is an organic disease, and in an advanced state, but all
tests/les_miserables.txt:13840:those things are such mysteries: we may be able to save her.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13850:It was nearly eight o’clock in the evening when the cart, which we left
tests/les_miserables.txt:13851:on the road, entered the porte-cochère of the Hotel de la Poste in
tests/les_miserables.txt:13853:from it, responded with an abstracted air to the attentions of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13854:people of the inn, sent back the extra horse, and with his own hands
tests/les_miserables.txt:13856:billiard-room which was situated on the ground floor, sat down there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13858:journey which he had counted on making in six; he did himself the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13859:justice to acknowledge that it was not his fault, but at bottom, he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:13872:Here he broke his silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13874:“Will not the horse be in a condition to set out again to-morrow
tests/les_miserables.txt:13883:“Is not the posting-station located here?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13889:The hostess conducted him to the office; he showed his passport, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:13891:sur M. by the mail-wagon; the seat beside the post-boy chanced to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:13892:vacant; he engaged it and paid for it. “Monsieur,” said the clerk, “do
tests/les_miserables.txt:13893:not fail to be here ready to start at precisely one o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13899:He was not acquainted with Arras; the streets were dark, and he walked
tests/les_miserables.txt:13901:passers-by. He crossed the little river Crinchon, and found himself in
tests/les_miserables.txt:13902:a labyrinth of narrow alleys where he lost his way. A citizen was
tests/les_miserables.txt:13903:passing along with a lantern. After some hesitation, he decided to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13904:apply to this man, not without having first glanced behind and in front
tests/les_miserables.txt:13906:which he was about to put.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13908:“Monsieur,” said he, “where is the court-house, if you please.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13912:oldish man; “well, follow me. I happen to be going in the direction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13913:the court-house, that is to say, in the direction of the hotel of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13914:prefecture; for the court-house is undergoing repairs just at this
tests/les_miserables.txt:13915:moment, and the courts are holding their sittings provisionally in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13916:prefecture.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13921:“Certainly, sir; you see, the prefecture of to-day was the bishop’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:13922:palace before the Revolution. M. de Conzié, who was bishop in ’82,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13923:built a grand hall there. It is in this grand hall that the court is
tests/les_miserables.txt:13929:“If Monsieur desires to witness a case, it is rather late. The sittings
tests/les_miserables.txt:13930:generally close at six o’clock.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13937:“Upon my word, sir, you are in luck; you have arrived in season. Do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:13940:protracted, and they are holding an evening session. Do you take an
tests/les_miserables.txt:13941:interest in this affair? Is it a criminal case? Are you a witness?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13946:“I have not come on any business; I only wish to speak to one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:13951:where the sentry stands. You have only to ascend the grand staircase.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13954:He conformed to the bourgeois’s directions, and a few minutes later he
tests/les_miserables.txt:13955:was in a hall containing many people, and where groups, intermingled
tests/les_miserables.txt:13958:It is always a heart-breaking thing to see these congregations of men
tests/les_miserables.txt:13959:robed in black, murmuring together in low voices, on the threshold of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13960:the halls of justice. It is rare that charity and pity are the outcome
tests/les_miserables.txt:13961:of these words. Condemnations pronounced in advance are more likely to
tests/les_miserables.txt:13963:observer so many sombre hives where buzzing spirits construct in
tests/les_miserables.txt:13964:concert all sorts of dark edifices.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13966:This spacious hall, illuminated by a single lamp, was the old hall of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13967:the episcopal palace, and served as the large hall of the palace of
tests/les_miserables.txt:13968:justice. A double-leaved door, which was closed at that moment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:13969:separated it from the large apartment where the court was sitting.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13971:The obscurity was such that he did not fear to accost the first lawyer
tests/les_miserables.txt:13974:“What stage have they reached, sir?” he asked.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13981:This word was repeated in such accents that the lawyer turned round.
tests/les_miserables.txt:13983:“Excuse me sir; perhaps you are a relative?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13986:“No; I know no one here. Has judgment been pronounced?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13989:“Of course. Nothing else was possible.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:13998:He continued, in a voice so weak that it was barely audible:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14005:child; the infanticide was proved; the jury threw out the question of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14006:premeditation, and she was condemned for life.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14011:“Why, certainly. The Limosin woman. Of what are you speaking?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14014:“Nothing. But since it is all over, how comes it that the hall is still
tests/les_miserables.txt:14018:“For another case, which was begun about two hours ago.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14021:“What other case?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14024:“Oh! this one is a clear case also. It is about a sort of blackguard; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14025:man arrested for a second offence; a convict who has been guilty of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14026:theft. I don’t know his name exactly. There’s a bandit’s phiz for you!
tests/les_miserables.txt:14027:I’d send him to the galleys on the strength of his face alone.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14030:“Is there any way of getting into the court-room, sir?” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14032:“I really think that there is not. There is a great crowd. However, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14037:“Where is the entrance?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14043:The lawyer left him. In the course of a few moments he had experienced,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14044:almost simultaneously, almost intermingled with each other, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:14045:possible emotions. The words of this indifferent spectator had, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:14046:turn, pierced his heart like needles of ice and like blades of fire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14047:When he saw that nothing was settled, he breathed freely once more; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:14048:he could not have told whether what he felt was pain or pleasure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14051:docket of the session was very heavy; the president had appointed for
tests/les_miserables.txt:14052:the same day two short and simple cases. They had begun with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14053:infanticide, and now they had reached the convict, the old offender,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14056:been in the galleys at Toulon. It was that which lent a bad aspect to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14057:his case. However, the man’s examination and the depositions of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14058:witnesses had been completed, but the lawyer’s plea, and the speech of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14059:the public prosecutor were still to come; it could not be finished
tests/les_miserables.txt:14060:before midnight. The man would probably be condemned; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14061:attorney-general was very clever, and never _missed_ his culprits; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:14064:An usher stood at the door communicating with the hall of the Assizes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14083:“Because the hall is full.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14089:“Not another one. The door is closed. No one can enter now.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14093:three extra places behind Monsieur le Président, but Monsieur le
tests/les_miserables.txt:14094:Président only admits public functionaries to them.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14097:So saying, the usher turned his back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14099:He retired with bowed head, traversed the antechamber, and slowly
tests/les_miserables.txt:14100:descended the stairs, as though hesitating at every step. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:14101:probable that he was holding counsel with himself. The violent conflict
tests/les_miserables.txt:14102:which had been going on within him since the preceding evening was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:14103:yet ended; and every moment he encountered some new phase of it. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:14104:reaching the landing-place, he leaned his back against the balusters
tests/les_miserables.txt:14105:and folded his arms. All at once he opened his coat, drew out his
tests/les_miserables.txt:14106:pocket-book, took from it a pencil, tore out a leaf, and upon that leaf
tests/les_miserables.txt:14108:Madeleine, Mayor of M. sur M._; then he ascended the stairs once more
tests/les_miserables.txt:14109:with great strides, made his way through the crowd, walked straight up
tests/les_miserables.txt:14116:The usher took the paper, cast a glance upon it, and obeyed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14124:Although he did not suspect the fact, the mayor of M. sur M. enjoyed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14125:sort of celebrity. For the space of seven years his reputation for
tests/les_miserables.txt:14127:the confines of a small district and had been spread abroad through two
tests/les_miserables.txt:14128:or three neighboring departments. Besides the service which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14129:rendered to the chief town by resuscitating the black jet industry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14130:there was not one out of the hundred and forty communes of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14131:arrondissement of M. sur M. which was not indebted to him for some
tests/les_miserables.txt:14132:benefit. He had even at need contrived to aid and multiply the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14134:occasion offered, supported with his credit and his funds the linen
tests/les_miserables.txt:14135:factory at Boulogne, the flax-spinning industry at Frévent, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14136:hydraulic manufacture of cloth at Boubers-sur-Canche. Everywhere the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14137:name of M. Madeleine was pronounced with veneration. Arras and Douai
tests/les_miserables.txt:14140:The Councillor of the Royal Court of Douai, who was presiding over this
tests/les_miserables.txt:14141:session of the Assizes at Arras, was acquainted, in common with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14142:rest of the world, with this name which was so profoundly and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14143:universally honored. When the usher, discreetly opening the door which
tests/les_miserables.txt:14144:connected the council-chamber with the court-room, bent over the back
tests/les_miserables.txt:14145:of the President’s armchair and handed him the paper on which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14146:inscribed the line which we have just perused, adding: “The gentleman
tests/les_miserables.txt:14147:desires to be present at the trial,” the President, with a quick and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14153:door of the hall, in the same place and the same attitude in which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14156:same usher who had turned his back upon him but a moment previously,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14158:usher handed him the paper. He unfolded it, and as he chanced to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:14159:near the light, he could read it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14161:“The President of the Court of Assizes presents his respects to M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14165:He crushed the paper in his hand as though those words contained for
tests/les_miserables.txt:14170:A few minutes later he found himself alone in a sort of wainscoted
tests/les_miserables.txt:14171:cabinet of severe aspect, lighted by two wax candles, placed upon a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14172:table with a green cloth. The last words of the usher who had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:14174:council-chamber; you have only to turn the copper handle of yonder
tests/les_miserables.txt:14175:door, and you will find yourself in the court-room, behind the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14176:President’s chair.” These words were mingled in his thoughts with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14177:vague memory of narrow corridors and dark staircases which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14178:recently traversed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14181:to collect his faculties, but could not. It is chiefly at the moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:14182:when there is the greatest need for attaching them to the painful
tests/les_miserables.txt:14184:He was in the very place where the judges deliberated and condemned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14185:With stupid tranquillity he surveyed this peaceful and terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:14186:apartment, where so many lives had been broken, which was soon to ring
tests/les_miserables.txt:14187:with his name, and which his fate was at that moment traversing. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:14189:be that chamber and that it should be he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14192:jolts of the cart, but he was not conscious of it. It seemed to him
tests/les_miserables.txt:14195:He approached a black frame which was suspended on the wall, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:14196:contained, under glass, an ancient autograph letter of Jean Nicolas
tests/les_miserables.txt:14197:Pache, mayor of Paris and minister, and dated, through an error, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:14198:doubt, the _9th of June_, of the year II., and in which Pache forwarded
tests/les_miserables.txt:14199:to the commune the list of ministers and deputies held in arrest by
tests/les_miserables.txt:14200:them. Any spectator who had chanced to see him at that moment, and who
tests/les_miserables.txt:14201:had watched him, would have imagined, doubtless, that this letter
tests/les_miserables.txt:14202:struck him as very curious, for he did not take his eyes from it, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14204:to it, and unconsciously. He was thinking of Fantine and Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14207:of the door which separated him from the Court of Assizes. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14208:almost forgotten that door. His glance, calm at first, paused there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14210:little became impregnated with fear. Beads of perspiration burst forth
tests/les_miserables.txt:14211:among his hair and trickled down upon his temples.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14213:At a certain moment he made that indescribable gesture of a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14214:authority mingled with rebellion, which is intended to convey, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14215:which does so well convey, _“Pardieu! who compels me to this?”_ Then he
tests/les_miserables.txt:14216:wheeled briskly round, caught sight of the door through which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14218:no longer in that chamber; he was outside in a corridor, a long, narrow
tests/les_miserables.txt:14219:corridor, broken by steps and gratings, making all sorts of angles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14221:invalids, the corridor through which he had approached. He breathed, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:14225:When he had turned many angles in this corridor, he still listened. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:14226:same silence reigned, and there was the same darkness around him. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:14228:was cold; the perspiration lay ice-cold on his brow; he straightened
tests/les_miserables.txt:14231:Then, there alone in the darkness, trembling with cold and with
tests/les_miserables.txt:14232:something else, too, perchance, he meditated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14235:within him but one voice, which said, “Alas!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14239:with agony, dropped his arms, and retraced his steps. He walked slowly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14240:and as though crushed. It seemed as though some one had overtaken him
tests/les_miserables.txt:14241:in his flight and was leading him back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14243:He re-entered the council-chamber. The first thing he caught sight of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14244:was the knob of the door. This knob, which was round and of polished
tests/les_miserables.txt:14248:He could not take his eyes from it. From time to time he advanced a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14249:step and approached the door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14252:like a sort of confused murmur; but he did not listen, and he did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:14256:near the door; he grasped the knob convulsively; the door opened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14258:He was in the court-room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14266:He advanced a pace, closed the door mechanically behind him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14267:remained standing, contemplating what he saw.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14270:of silence, where all the apparatus of a criminal case, with its petty
tests/les_miserables.txt:14271:and mournful gravity in the midst of the throng, was in process of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14275:abstracted air, in threadbare robes, who were gnawing their nails or
tests/les_miserables.txt:14276:closing their eyelids; at the other end, a ragged crowd; lawyers in all
tests/les_miserables.txt:14277:sorts of attitudes; soldiers with hard but honest faces; ancient,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14278:spotted woodwork, a dirty ceiling, tables covered with serge that was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14279:yellow rather than green; doors blackened by handmarks; tap-room lamps
tests/les_miserables.txt:14280:which emitted more smoke than light, suspended from nails in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14281:wainscot; on the tables candles in brass candlesticks; darkness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14283:and august impression, for one there felt that grand human thing which
tests/les_miserables.txt:14284:is called the law, and that grand divine thing which is called justice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14286:No one in all that throng paid any attention to him; all glances were
tests/les_miserables.txt:14287:directed towards a single point, a wooden bench placed against a small
tests/les_miserables.txt:14288:door, in the stretch of wall on the President’s left; on this bench,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14289:illuminated by several candles, sat a man between two gendarmes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14297:same in face, of course, but exactly similar in attitude and aspect,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14300:concealing his soul in that hideous mass of frightful thoughts which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:14301:had spent nineteen years in collecting on the floor of the prison.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14303:He said to himself with a shudder, “Good God! shall I become like that
tests/les_miserables.txt:14307:This creature seemed to be at least sixty; there was something
tests/les_miserables.txt:14308:indescribably coarse, stupid, and frightened about him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14314:M., whither the duties of his office had called him more than once,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14315:recognized him and saluted him also: he had hardly perceived it; he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14316:the victim of a sort of hallucination; he was watching.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14318:Judges, clerks, gendarmes, a throng of cruelly curious heads, all these
tests/les_miserables.txt:14319:he had already beheld once, in days gone by, twenty-seven years before;
tests/les_miserables.txt:14320:he had encountered those fatal things once more; there they were; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:14322:of his thought; they were real gendarmes and real judges, a real crowd,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14324:monstrous aspects of his past reappear and live once more around him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14329:He was horrified by it; he shut his eyes, and exclaimed in the deepest
tests/les_miserables.txt:14330:recesses of his soul, “Never!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14333:And by a tragic play of destiny which made all his ideas tremble, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14335:called that man who was being tried Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14338:of the most horrible moment of his life, enacted by his spectre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14341:night, the faces of the judges, of soldiers, and of spectators; all
tests/les_miserables.txt:14342:were the same, only above the President’s head there hung a crucifix,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14343:something which the courts had lacked at the time of his condemnation:
tests/les_miserables.txt:14346:There was a chair behind him; he dropped into it, terrified at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14348:a pile of cardboard boxes, which stood on the judge’s desk, to conceal
tests/les_miserables.txt:14349:his face from the whole room; he could now see without being seen; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:14350:had fully regained consciousness of the reality of things; gradually he
tests/les_miserables.txt:14351:recovered; he attained that phase of composure where it is possible to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14357:was hidden from him by the clerk’s table, and then, as we have just
tests/les_miserables.txt:14360:At the moment of this entrance, the defendant’s lawyer had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:14363:The attention of all was excited to the highest pitch; the affair had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14364:lasted for three hours: for three hours that crowd had been watching a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14365:strange man, a miserable specimen of humanity, either profoundly stupid
tests/les_miserables.txt:14368:vagabond who had been found in a field carrying a branch laden with
tests/les_miserables.txt:14369:ripe apples, broken in the orchard of a neighbor, called the Pierron
tests/les_miserables.txt:14370:orchard. Who was this man? an examination had been made; witnesses had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14372:entire debate; the accusation said: “We have in our grasp not only a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14374:old offender who has broken his ban, an ex-convict, a miscreant of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14375:most dangerous description, a malefactor named Jean Valjean, whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:14376:justice has long been in search of, and who, eight years ago, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:14377:emerging from the galleys at Toulon, committed a highway robbery,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14378:accompanied by violence, on the person of a child, a Savoyard named
tests/les_miserables.txt:14379:Little Gervais; a crime provided for by article 383 of the Penal Code,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14380:the right to try him for which we reserve hereafter, when his identity
tests/les_miserables.txt:14381:shall have been judicially established. He has just committed a fresh
tests/les_miserables.txt:14382:theft; it is a case of a second offence; condemn him for the fresh
tests/les_miserables.txt:14383:deed; later on he will be judged for the old crime.” In the face of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14384:this accusation, in the face of the unanimity of the witnesses, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14385:accused appeared to be astonished more than anything else; he made
tests/les_miserables.txt:14386:signs and gestures which were meant to convey No, or else he stared at
tests/les_miserables.txt:14387:the ceiling: he spoke with difficulty, replied with embarrassment, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:14389:the presence of all these minds ranged in order of battle around him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14390:and like a stranger in the midst of this society which was seizing fast
tests/les_miserables.txt:14391:upon him; nevertheless, it was a question of the most menacing future
tests/les_miserables.txt:14392:for him; the likeness increased every moment, and the entire crowd
tests/les_miserables.txt:14393:surveyed, with more anxiety than he did himself, that sentence
tests/les_miserables.txt:14394:freighted with calamity, which descended ever closer over his head;
tests/les_miserables.txt:14396:galleys, a possible death penalty, in case his identity were
tests/les_miserables.txt:14398:condemnation. Who was this man? what was the nature of his apathy? was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14399:it imbecility or craft? Did he understand too well, or did he not
tests/les_miserables.txt:14400:understand at all? these were questions which divided the crowd, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14402:puzzling in this case: the drama was not only melancholy; it was also
tests/les_miserables.txt:14403:obscure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14405:The counsel for the defence had spoken tolerably well, in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:14406:provincial tongue which has long constituted the eloquence of the bar,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14407:and which was formerly employed by all advocates, at Paris as well as
tests/les_miserables.txt:14408:at Romorantin or at Montbrison, and which to-day, having become
tests/les_miserables.txt:14409:classic, is no longer spoken except by the official orators of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14410:magistracy, to whom it is suited on account of its grave sonorousness
tests/les_miserables.txt:14411:and its majestic stride; a tongue in which a husband is called _a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14412:consort_, and a woman _a spouse_; Paris, _the centre of art and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14413:civilization_; the king, _the monarch_; Monseigneur the Bishop, _a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14414:sainted pontiff_; the district-attorney, _the eloquent interpreter of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14415:public prosecution_; the arguments, _the accents which we have just
tests/les_miserables.txt:14418:kings_; a concert, _a musical solemnity_; the General Commandant of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14419:province, _the illustrious warrior, who, etc._; the pupils in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14421:imposture which distills its venom through the columns of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:14422:organs_; etc. The lawyer had, accordingly, begun with an explanation as
tests/les_miserables.txt:14423:to the theft of the apples,—an awkward matter couched in fine style;
tests/les_miserables.txt:14424:but Bénigne Bossuet himself was obliged to allude to a chicken in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14425:midst of a funeral oration, and he extricated himself from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14426:situation in stately fashion. The lawyer established the fact that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14427:theft of the apples had not been circumstantially proved. His client,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14428:whom he, in his character of counsel, persisted in calling
tests/les_miserables.txt:14429:Champmathieu, had not been seen scaling that wall nor breaking that
tests/les_miserables.txt:14430:branch by any one. He had been taken with that branch (which the lawyer
tests/les_miserables.txt:14431:preferred to call a _bough_) in his possession; but he said that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14432:found it broken off and lying on the ground, and had picked it up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14433:Where was there any proof to the contrary? No doubt that branch had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14434:been broken off and concealed after the scaling of the wall, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:14436:been a thief in the case. But what proof was there that that thief had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14437:been Champmathieu? One thing only. His character as an ex-convict. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:14438:lawyer did not deny that that character appeared to be, unhappily, well
tests/les_miserables.txt:14439:attested; the accused had resided at Faverolles; the accused had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14440:exercised the calling of a tree-pruner there; the name of Champmathieu
tests/les_miserables.txt:14442:short, four witnesses recognize Champmathieu, positively and without
tests/les_miserables.txt:14443:hesitation, as that convict, Jean Valjean; to these signs, to this
tests/les_miserables.txt:14444:testimony, the counsel could oppose nothing but the denial of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:14445:client, the denial of an interested party; but supposing that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14446:the convict Jean Valjean, did that prove that he was the thief of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14448:it was true, and his counsel, “in good faith,” was obliged to admit it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14449:had adopted “a bad system of defence.” He obstinately denied
tests/les_miserables.txt:14450:everything, the theft and his character of convict. An admission upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:14451:this last point would certainly have been better, and would have won
tests/les_miserables.txt:14452:for him the indulgence of his judges; the counsel had advised him to do
tests/les_miserables.txt:14453:this; but the accused had obstinately refused, thinking, no doubt, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:14455:ought not the paucity of this intelligence to be taken into
tests/les_miserables.txt:14456:consideration? This man was visibly stupid. Long-continued wretchedness
tests/les_miserables.txt:14458:etc. He defended himself badly; was that a reason for condemning him?
tests/les_miserables.txt:14459:As for the affair with Little Gervais, the counsel need not discuss it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:14460:it did not enter into the case. The lawyer wound up by beseeching the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14461:jury and the court, if the identity of Jean Valjean appeared to them to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14462:be evident, to apply to him the police penalties which are provided for
tests/les_miserables.txt:14463:a criminal who has broken his ban, and not the frightful chastisement
tests/les_miserables.txt:14464:which descends upon the convict guilty of a second offence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14466:The district-attorney answered the counsel for the defence. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14467:violent and florid, as district-attorneys usually are.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14469:He congratulated the counsel for the defence on his “loyalty,” and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14470:skilfully took advantage of this loyalty. He reached the accused
tests/les_miserables.txt:14471:through all the concessions made by his lawyer. The advocate had seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:14473:this man was Jean Valjean. This point had been conceded to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14474:accusation and could no longer be disputed. Here, by means of a clever
tests/les_miserables.txt:14475:autonomasia which went back to the sources and causes of crime, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14476:district-attorney thundered against the immorality of the romantic
tests/les_miserables.txt:14477:school, then dawning under the name of _the Satanic school_, which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14478:been bestowed upon it by the critics of the _Quotidienne_ and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14480:influence of this perverse literature the crime of Champmathieu, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:14481:rather, to speak more correctly, of Jean Valjean. Having exhausted
tests/les_miserables.txt:14482:these considerations, he passed on to Jean Valjean himself. Who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14483:this Jean Valjean? Description of Jean Valjean: a monster spewed forth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14484:etc. The model for this sort of description is contained in the tale of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14485:Théramène, which is not useful to tragedy, but which every day renders
tests/les_miserables.txt:14486:great services to judicial eloquence. The audience and the jury
tests/les_miserables.txt:14487:“shuddered.” The description finished, the district-attorney resumed
tests/les_miserables.txt:14488:with an oratorical turn calculated to raise the enthusiasm of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14489:journal of the prefecture to the highest pitch on the following day:
tests/les_miserables.txt:14490:And it is such a man, etc., etc., etc., vagabond, beggar, without means
tests/les_miserables.txt:14491:of existence, etc., etc., inured by his past life to culpable deeds,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14493:the crime committed against Little Gervais, etc., etc.; it is such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14494:man, caught upon the highway in the very act of theft, a few paces from
tests/les_miserables.txt:14495:a wall that had been scaled, still holding in his hand the object
tests/les_miserables.txt:14496:stolen, who denies the crime, the theft, the climbing the wall; denies
tests/les_miserables.txt:14498:other proofs, to which we will not recur, four witnesses recognize
tests/les_miserables.txt:14499:him—Javert, the upright inspector of police; Javert, and three of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:14500:former companions in infamy, the convicts Brevet, Chenildieu, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14501:Cochepaille. What does he offer in opposition to this overwhelming
tests/les_miserables.txt:14502:unanimity? His denial. What obduracy! You will do justice, gentlemen of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14503:the jury, etc., etc. While the district-attorney was speaking, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14504:accused listened to him open-mouthed, with a sort of amazement in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:14506:a man could talk like that. From time to time, at those “energetic”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14507:moments of the prosecutor’s speech, when eloquence which cannot contain
tests/les_miserables.txt:14509:accused like a storm, he moved his head slowly from right to left and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14510:from left to right in the sort of mute and melancholy protest with
tests/les_miserables.txt:14511:which he had contented himself since the beginning of the argument. Two
tests/les_miserables.txt:14512:or three times the spectators who were nearest to him heard him say in
tests/les_miserables.txt:14513:a low voice, “That is what comes of not having asked M. Baloup.” The
tests/les_miserables.txt:14514:district-attorney directed the attention of the jury to this stupid
tests/les_miserables.txt:14515:attitude, evidently deliberate, which denoted not imbecility, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:14516:craft, skill, a habit of deceiving justice, and which set forth in all
tests/les_miserables.txt:14519:sentence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14524:The counsel for the defence rose, began by complimenting Monsieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:14525:l’Avocat-General on his “admirable speech,” then replied as best he
tests/les_miserables.txt:14526:could; but he weakened; the ground was evidently slipping away from
tests/les_miserables.txt:14535:The moment for closing the debate had arrived. The President had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14536:accused stand up, and addressed to him the customary question, “Have
tests/les_miserables.txt:14537:you anything to add to your defence?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14541:his hands a terrible cap which he had.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14546:like a man who is just waking up, cast his eyes about him, stared at
tests/les_miserables.txt:14547:the audience, the gendarmes, his counsel, the jury, the court, laid his
tests/les_miserables.txt:14548:monstrous fist on the rim of woodwork in front of his bench, took
tests/les_miserables.txt:14549:another look, and all at once, fixing his glance upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14550:district-attorney, he began to speak. It was like an eruption. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:14551:seemed, from the manner in which the words escaped from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:14552:mouth,—incoherent, impetuous, pell-mell, tumbling over each other,—as
tests/les_miserables.txt:14553:though they were all pressing forward to issue forth at once. He said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14557:wheelwright’s trade one works always in the open air, in courtyards,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14558:under sheds when the masters are good, never in closed workshops,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14559:because space is required, you see. In winter one gets so cold that one
tests/les_miserables.txt:14561:like it; they say it wastes time. Handling iron when there is ice
tests/les_miserables.txt:14562:between the paving-stones is hard work. That wears a man out quickly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14565:are so mean! When a man is no longer young, they call him nothing but
tests/les_miserables.txt:14569:earned a little also. It sufficed for us two. She had trouble, also;
tests/les_miserables.txt:14571:cuts your face, when it freezes, it is all the same; you must still
tests/les_miserables.txt:14572:wash. There are people who have not much linen, and wait until late; if
tests/les_miserables.txt:14573:you do not wash, you lose your custom. The planks are badly joined, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14574:water drops on you from everywhere; you have your petticoats all damp
tests/les_miserables.txt:14576:the Enfants-Rouges, where the water comes through faucets. You are not
tests/les_miserables.txt:14577:in the tub there; you wash at the faucet in front of you, and rinse in
tests/les_miserables.txt:14578:a basin behind you. As it is enclosed, you are not so cold; but there
tests/les_miserables.txt:14579:is that hot steam, which is terrible, and which ruins your eyes. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:14580:came home at seven o’clock in the evening, and went to bed at once, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:14583:very peaceable. I remember one Shrove-Tuesday when she went to bed at
tests/les_miserables.txt:14584:eight o’clock. There, I am telling the truth; you have only to ask. Ah,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14590:The man ceased speaking, and remained standing. He had said these
tests/les_miserables.txt:14591:things in a loud, rapid, hoarse voice, with a sort of irritated and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14592:savage ingenuousness. Once he paused to salute some one in the crowd.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14593:The sort of affirmations which he seemed to fling out before him at
tests/les_miserables.txt:14594:random came like hiccoughs, and to each he added the gesture of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14595:wood-cutter who is splitting wood. When he had finished, the audience
tests/les_miserables.txt:14596:burst into a laugh. He stared at the public, and, perceiving that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:14599:It was inauspicious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14601:The President, an attentive and benevolent man, raised his voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14604:formerly a master-wheelwright, with whom the accused stated that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14605:served, had been summoned in vain. He had become bankrupt, and was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:14606:to be found.” Then turning to the accused, he enjoined him to listen to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14608:reflection is necessary. The gravest presumptions rest upon you, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14609:may induce vital results. Prisoner, in your own interests, I summon you
tests/les_miserables.txt:14610:for the last time to explain yourself clearly on two points. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14611:first place, did you or did you not climb the wall of the Pierron
tests/les_miserables.txt:14612:orchard, break the branch, and steal the apples; that is to say, commit
tests/les_miserables.txt:14613:the crime of breaking in and theft? In the second place, are you the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14614:discharged convict, Jean Valjean—yes or no?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14617:The prisoner shook his head with a capable air, like a man who has
tests/les_miserables.txt:14621:“In the first place—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14624:Then he stared at his cap, stared at the ceiling, and held his peace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14626:“Prisoner,” said the district-attorney, in a severe voice; “pay
tests/les_miserables.txt:14628:Your embarrassment condemns you. It is evident that your name is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:14629:Champmathieu; that you are the convict, Jean Valjean, concealed first
tests/les_miserables.txt:14630:under the name of Jean Mathieu, which was the name of his mother; that
tests/les_miserables.txt:14633:and of the theft of ripe apples from the Pierron orchard. The gentlemen
tests/les_miserables.txt:14639:district-attorney had finished, and exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14641:“You are very wicked; that you are! This what I wanted to say; I could
tests/les_miserables.txt:14643:does not have something to eat every day. I was coming from Ailly; I
tests/les_miserables.txt:14644:was walking through the country after a shower, which had made the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14645:whole country yellow: even the ponds were overflowed, and nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:14647:wayside. I found a broken branch with apples on the ground; I picked up
tests/les_miserables.txt:14648:the branch without knowing that it would get me into trouble. I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:14650:months; more than that I cannot say; people talk against me, they tell
tests/les_miserables.txt:14652:says to me in a low voice, ‘Come, answer!’ I don’t know how to explain;
tests/les_miserables.txt:14653:I have no education; I am a poor man; that is where they wrong me,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14654:because they do not see this. I have not stolen; I picked up from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14658:very clever to tell me where I was born; I don’t know myself: it’s not
tests/les_miserables.txt:14659:everybody who has a house in which to come into the world; that would
tests/les_miserables.txt:14660:be too convenient. I think that my father and mother were people who
tests/les_miserables.txt:14662:child, they called me _young fellow_; now they call me _old Fellow_;
tests/les_miserables.txt:14664:Auvergne; I have been at Faverolles. Pardi. Well! can’t a man have been
tests/les_miserables.txt:14667:have been with M. Baloup; I have had a settled residence. You worry me
tests/les_miserables.txt:14671:The district-attorney had remained standing; he addressed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14674:“Monsieur le Président, in view of the confused but exceedingly clever
tests/les_miserables.txt:14676:idiot, but who will not succeed in so doing,—we shall attend to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14678:court to summon once more into this place the convicts Brevet,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14679:Cochepaille, and Chenildieu, and Police-Inspector Javert, and question
tests/les_miserables.txt:14681:convict Jean Valjean.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14684:“I would remind the district-attorney,” said the President, “that
tests/les_miserables.txt:14685:Police-Inspector Javert, recalled by his duties to the capital of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14686:neighboring arrondissement, left the court-room and the town as soon as
tests/les_miserables.txt:14687:he had made his deposition; we have accorded him permission, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14688:consent of the district-attorney and of the counsel for the prisoner.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14691:“That is true, Mr. President,” responded the district-attorney. “In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14692:absence of sieur Javert, I think it my duty to remind the gentlemen of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14694:man, who does honor by his rigorous and strict probity to inferior but
tests/les_miserables.txt:14695:important functions. These are the terms of his deposition: ‘I do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:14696:even stand in need of circumstantial proofs and moral presumptions to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14697:give the lie to the prisoner’s denial. I recognize him perfectly. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:14698:name of this man is not Champmathieu; he is an ex-convict named Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:14699:Valjean, and is very vicious and much to be feared. It is only with
tests/les_miserables.txt:14702:six attempts to escape. Besides the theft from Little Gervais, and from
tests/les_miserables.txt:14703:the Pierron orchard, I suspect him of a theft committed in the house of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14704:His Grace the late Bishop of D—— I often saw him at the time when I was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14706:recognize him perfectly.’”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14709:This extremely precise statement appeared to produce a vivid impression
tests/les_miserables.txt:14710:on the public and on the jury. The district-attorney concluded by
tests/les_miserables.txt:14712:Chenildieu, and Cochepaille should be heard once more and solemnly
tests/les_miserables.txt:14716:the door of the witnesses’ room opened. The usher, accompanied by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14717:gendarme ready to lend him armed assistance, introduced the convict
tests/les_miserables.txt:14718:Brevet. The audience was in suspense; and all breasts heaved as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:14719:they had contained but one soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14721:The ex-convict Brevet wore the black and gray waistcoat of the central
tests/les_miserables.txt:14723:business man’s face, and the air of a rascal. The two sometimes go
tests/les_miserables.txt:14724:together. In prison, whither fresh misdeeds had led him, he had become
tests/les_miserables.txt:14726:superiors said, “He tries to make himself of use.” The chaplains bore
tests/les_miserables.txt:14731:sentence, and you cannot take an oath.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14736:“Nevertheless,” continued the President, “even in the man whom the law
tests/les_miserables.txt:14737:has degraded, there may remain, when the divine mercy permits it, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14739:at this decisive hour. If it still exists in you,—and I hope it
tests/les_miserables.txt:14740:does,—reflect before replying to me: consider on the one hand, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:14741:man, whom a word from you may ruin; on the other hand, justice, which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14743:to retract if you think you have been mistaken. Rise, prisoner. Brevet,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14744:take a good look at the accused, recall your souvenirs, and tell us on
tests/les_miserables.txt:14745:your soul and conscience, if you persist in recognizing this man as
tests/les_miserables.txt:14746:your former companion in the galleys, Jean Valjean?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14749:Brevet looked at the prisoner, then turned towards the court.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14751:“Yes, Mr. President, I was the first to recognize him, and I stick to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14754:must be because age has brutalized him; he was sly at the galleys: I
tests/les_miserables.txt:14755:recognize him positively.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14761:Chenildieu was brought in, a prisoner for life, as was indicated by his
tests/les_miserables.txt:14762:red cassock and his green cap. He was serving out his sentence at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14763:galleys of Toulon, whence he had been brought for this case. He was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14764:small man of about fifty, brisk, wrinkled, frail, yellow, brazen-faced,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14765:feverish, who had a sort of sickly feebleness about all his limbs and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14766:his whole person, and an immense force in his glance. His companions in
tests/les_miserables.txt:14767:the galleys had nicknamed him _I-deny-God_ (_Je-nie Dieu_, Chenildieu).
tests/les_miserables.txt:14769:The President addressed him in nearly the same words which he had used
tests/les_miserables.txt:14770:to Brevet. At the moment when he reminded him of his infamy which
tests/les_miserables.txt:14772:and looked the crowd in the face. The President invited him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14773:reflection, and asked him as he had asked Brevet, if he persisted in
tests/les_miserables.txt:14774:recognition of the prisoner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14778:“Pardieu, as if I didn’t recognize him! We were attached to the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:14779:chain for five years. So you are sulking, old fellow?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14784:The usher brought in Cochepaille. He was another convict for life, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:14785:had come from the galleys, and was dressed in red, like Chenildieu, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14787:the flocks among the mountains, and from a shepherd he had slipped into
tests/les_miserables.txt:14788:a brigand. Cochepaille was no less savage and seemed even more stupid
tests/les_miserables.txt:14789:than the prisoner. He was one of those wretched men whom nature has
tests/les_miserables.txt:14790:sketched out for wild beasts, and on whom society puts the finishing
tests/les_miserables.txt:14791:touches as convicts in the galleys.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14793:The President tried to touch him with some grave and pathetic words,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14795:hesitation or trouble, in recognizing the man who was standing before
tests/les_miserables.txt:14798:“He is Jean Valjean,” said Cochepaille. “He was even called
tests/les_miserables.txt:14799:Jean-the-Screw, because he was so strong.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14802:Each of these affirmations from these three men, evidently sincere and
tests/les_miserables.txt:14803:in good faith, had raised in the audience a murmur of bad augury for
tests/les_miserables.txt:14804:the prisoner,—a murmur which increased and lasted longer each time that
tests/les_miserables.txt:14805:a fresh declaration was added to the proceeding.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14807:The prisoner had listened to them, with that astounded face which was,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14808:according to the accusation, his principal means of defence; at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14810:teeth: “Ah, well, he’s a nice one!” after the second, he said, a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:14811:louder, with an air that was almost that of satisfaction, “Good!” at
tests/les_miserables.txt:14812:the third, he cried, “Famous!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14825:An uproar broke out among the audience, and was communicated to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14828:“Ushers,” said the President, “enforce silence! I am going to sum up
tests/les_miserables.txt:14832:At that moment there was a movement just beside the President; a voice
tests/les_miserables.txt:14833:was heard crying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14835:“Brevet! Chenildieu! Cochepaille! look here!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14838:All who heard that voice were chilled, so lamentable and terrible was
tests/les_miserables.txt:14839:it; all eyes were turned to the point whence it had proceeded. A man,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14840:placed among the privileged spectators who were seated behind the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14841:court, had just risen, had pushed open the half-door which separated
tests/les_miserables.txt:14842:the tribunal from the audience, and was standing in the middle of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14843:hall; the President, the district-attorney, M. Bamatabois, twenty
tests/les_miserables.txt:14844:persons, recognized him, and exclaimed in concert:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14855:It was he, in fact. The clerk’s lamp illumined his countenance. He held
tests/les_miserables.txt:14856:his hat in his hand; there was no disorder in his clothing; his coat
tests/les_miserables.txt:14857:was carefully buttoned; he was very pale, and he trembled slightly; his
tests/les_miserables.txt:14858:hair, which had still been gray on his arrival in Arras, was now
tests/les_miserables.txt:14861:All heads were raised: the sensation was indescribable; there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14862:momentary hesitation in the audience, the voice had been so
tests/les_miserables.txt:14863:heart-rending; the man who stood there appeared so calm that they did
tests/les_miserables.txt:14865:uttered that cry; they could not believe that that tranquil man had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14866:been the one to give that terrible outcry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14868:This indecision only lasted a few seconds. Even before the President
tests/les_miserables.txt:14869:and the district-attorney could utter a word, before the ushers and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14870:gendarmes could make a gesture, the man whom all still called, at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:14871:moment, M. Madeleine, had advanced towards the witnesses Cochepaille,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14874:“Do you not recognize me?” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14876:All three remained speechless, and indicated by a sign of the head that
tests/les_miserables.txt:14877:they did not know him. Cochepaille, who was intimidated, made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14878:military salute. M. Madeleine turned towards the jury and the court,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14879:and said in a gentle voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14882:President, have me arrested. He is not the man whom you are in search
tests/les_miserables.txt:14886:Not a mouth breathed; the first commotion of astonishment had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:14887:followed by a silence like that of the grave; those within the hall
tests/les_miserables.txt:14888:experienced that sort of religious terror which seizes the masses when
tests/les_miserables.txt:14891:In the meantime, the face of the President was stamped with sympathy
tests/les_miserables.txt:14892:and sadness; he had exchanged a rapid sign with the district-attorney
tests/les_miserables.txt:14894:public, and asked in accents which all understood:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14896:“Is there a physician present?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14899:The district-attorney took the word:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14901:“Gentlemen of the jury, the very strange and unexpected incident which
tests/les_miserables.txt:14902:disturbs the audience inspires us, like yourselves, only with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14903:sentiment which it is unnecessary for us to express. You all know, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:14905:there is a physician in the audience, we join the President in
tests/les_miserables.txt:14906:requesting him to attend to M. Madeleine, and to conduct him to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:14910:M. Madeleine did not allow the district-attorney to finish; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:14911:interrupted him in accents full of suavity and authority. These are the
tests/les_miserables.txt:14912:words which he uttered; here they are literally, as they were written
tests/les_miserables.txt:14914:scene, and as they now ring in the ears of those who heard them nearly
tests/les_miserables.txt:14917:“I thank you, Mr. District-Attorney, but I am not mad; you shall see;
tests/les_miserables.txt:14918:you were on the point of committing a great error; release this man! I
tests/les_miserables.txt:14919:am fulfilling a duty; I am that miserable criminal. I am the only one
tests/les_miserables.txt:14920:here who sees the matter clearly, and I am telling you the truth. God,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14922:suffices. You can take me, for here I am: but I have done my best; I
tests/les_miserables.txt:14923:concealed myself under another name; I have become rich; I have become
tests/les_miserables.txt:14925:that that is not to be done. In short, there are many things which I
tests/les_miserables.txt:14926:cannot tell. I will not narrate the story of my life to you; you will
tests/les_miserables.txt:14929:that Jean Valjean was a very vicious wretch. Perhaps it was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:14931:greatly humbled as I have has neither any remonstrances to make to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14932:Providence, nor any advice to give to society; but, you see, the infamy
tests/les_miserables.txt:14933:from which I have tried to escape is an injurious thing; the galleys
tests/les_miserables.txt:14934:make the convict what he is; reflect upon that, if you please. Before
tests/les_miserables.txt:14936:intelligence, a sort of idiot; the galleys wrought a change in me. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:14937:was stupid; I became vicious: I was a block of wood; I became a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14938:firebrand. Later on, indulgence and kindness saved me, as severity had
tests/les_miserables.txt:14939:ruined me. But, pardon me, you cannot understand what I am saying. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:14940:will find at my house, among the ashes in the fireplace, the forty-sou
tests/les_miserables.txt:14941:piece which I stole, seven years ago, from Little Gervais. I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:14942:nothing farther to add; take me. Good God! the district-attorney shakes
tests/les_miserables.txt:14944:that is distressing. Do not, at least, condemn this man! What! these
tests/les_miserables.txt:14945:men do not recognize me! I wish Javert were here; he would recognize
tests/les_miserables.txt:14949:Nothing can reproduce the sombre and kindly melancholy of tone which
tests/les_miserables.txt:14950:accompanied these words.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14952:He turned to the three convicts, and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14954:“Well, I recognize you; do you remember, Brevet?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14959:“Do you remember the knitted suspenders with a checked pattern which
tests/les_miserables.txt:14964:with a frightened air. He continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14966:“Chenildieu, you who conferred on yourself the name of ‘Jenie-Dieu,’
tests/les_miserables.txt:14967:your whole right shoulder bears a deep burn, because you one day laid
tests/les_miserables.txt:14968:your shoulder against the chafing-dish full of coals, in order to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14969:efface the three letters T. F. P., which are still visible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:14975:He addressed himself to Cochepaille:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:14977:“Cochepaille, you have, near the bend in your left arm, a date stamped
tests/les_miserables.txt:14979:the Emperor at Cannes, March 1, 1815; pull up your sleeve!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:14982:Cochepaille pushed up his sleeve; all eyes were focused on him and on
tests/les_miserables.txt:14985:A gendarme held a light close to it; there was the date.
tests/les_miserables.txt:14987:The unhappy man turned to the spectators and the judges with a smile
tests/les_miserables.txt:14988:which still rends the hearts of all who saw it whenever they think of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14994:In that chamber there were no longer either judges, accusers, nor
tests/les_miserables.txt:14996:No one recalled any longer the part that each might be called upon to
tests/les_miserables.txt:14997:play; the district-attorney forgot he was there for the purpose of
tests/les_miserables.txt:14998:prosecuting, the President that he was there to preside, the counsel
tests/les_miserables.txt:14999:for the defence that he was there to defend. It was a striking
tests/les_miserables.txt:15000:circumstance that no question was put, that no authority intervened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15001:The peculiarity of sublime spectacles is, that they capture all souls
tests/les_miserables.txt:15002:and turn witnesses into spectators. No one, probably, could have
tests/les_miserables.txt:15008:clear. The appearance of this man had sufficed to suffuse with light
tests/les_miserables.txt:15009:that matter which had been so obscure but a moment previously, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:15010:any further explanation: the whole crowd, as by a sort of electric
tests/les_miserables.txt:15011:revelation, understood instantly and at a single glance the simple and
tests/les_miserables.txt:15012:magnificent history of a man who was delivering himself up so that
tests/les_miserables.txt:15013:another man might not be condemned in his stead. The details, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15015:vast and luminous fact.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15017:It was an impression which vanished speedily, but which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:15020:“I do not wish to disturb the court further,” resumed Jean Valjean. “I
tests/les_miserables.txt:15021:shall withdraw, since you do not arrest me. I have many things to do.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15022:The district-attorney knows who I am; he knows whither I am going; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:15023:can have me arrested when he likes.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15026:He directed his steps towards the door. Not a voice was raised, not an
tests/les_miserables.txt:15028:about him that divine something which causes multitudes to stand aside
tests/les_miserables.txt:15029:and make way for a man. He traversed the crowd slowly. It was never
tests/les_miserables.txt:15030:known who opened the door, but it is certain that he found the door
tests/les_miserables.txt:15031:open when he reached it. On arriving there he turned round and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15033:“I am at your command, Mr. District-Attorney.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15036:Then he addressed the audience:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15038:“All of you, all who are present—consider me worthy of pity, do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:15040:consider that I am to be envied. Nevertheless, I should have preferred
tests/les_miserables.txt:15041:not to have had this occur.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15044:He withdrew, and the door closed behind him as it had opened, for those
tests/les_miserables.txt:15045:who do certain sovereign things are always sure of being served by some
tests/les_miserables.txt:15046:one in the crowd.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15048:Less than an hour after this, the verdict of the jury freed the said
tests/les_miserables.txt:15049:Champmathieu from all accusations; and Champmathieu, being at once
tests/les_miserables.txt:15050:released, went off in a state of stupefaction, thinking that all men
tests/les_miserables.txt:15051:were fools, and comprehending nothing of this vision.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15066:Simplice, who had been watching with her, availed herself of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:15067:slumber to go and prepare a new potion of chinchona. The worthy sister
tests/les_miserables.txt:15069:over her drugs and phials, and scrutinizing things very closely, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:15070:account of the dimness which the half-light of dawn spreads over all
tests/les_miserables.txt:15071:objects. Suddenly she raised her head and uttered a faint shriek. M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15074:“Is it you, Mr. Mayor?” she exclaimed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15076:He replied in a low voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15085:the day before, and that she was better now, because she thought that
tests/les_miserables.txt:15086:the mayor had gone to Montfermeil to get her child. The sister dared
tests/les_miserables.txt:15087:not question the mayor; but she perceived plainly from his air that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:15088:had not come from there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15090:“All that is good,” said he; “you were right not to undeceive her.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15094:will not see her child. What shall we say to her?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15097:He reflected for a moment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15101:“But we cannot tell a lie,” murmured the sister, half aloud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15104:Madeleine’s face. The sister chanced to raise her eyes to it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15106:“Good God, sir!” she exclaimed; “what has happened to you? Your hair is
tests/les_miserables.txt:15107:perfectly white!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15112:Sister Simplice had no mirror. She rummaged in a drawer, and pulled out
tests/les_miserables.txt:15113:the little glass which the doctor of the infirmary used to see whether
tests/les_miserables.txt:15123:The sister felt chilled by something strange of which she caught a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15131:“Is not Monsieur le Maire going to have her child brought back to her?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15134:“Of course; but it will take two or three days at least.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15139:returned, and it would be easy to inspire her with patience; and when
tests/les_miserables.txt:15140:the child arrived, she would naturally think Monsieur le Maire had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:15141:come with the child. We should not have to enact a lie.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15144:M. Madeleine seemed to reflect for a few moments; then he said with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:15145:calm gravity:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15150:The nun did not appear to notice this word “perhaps,” which
tests/les_miserables.txt:15151:communicated an obscure and singular sense to the words of the mayor’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:15152:speech. She replied, lowering her eyes and her voice respectfully:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15154:“In that case, she is asleep; but Monsieur le Maire may enter.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15157:He made some remarks about a door which shut badly, and the noise of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15158:which might awaken the sick woman; then he entered Fantine’s chamber,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15159:approached the bed and drew aside the curtains. She was asleep. Her
tests/les_miserables.txt:15160:breath issued from her breast with that tragic sound which is peculiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:15161:to those maladies, and which breaks the hearts of mothers when they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:15162:watching through the night beside their sleeping child who is condemned
tests/les_miserables.txt:15164:ineffable serenity which overspread her countenance, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:15165:transfigured her in her sleep. Her pallor had become whiteness; her
tests/les_miserables.txt:15166:cheeks were crimson; her long golden lashes, the only beauty of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:15167:youth and her virginity which remained to her, palpitated, though they
tests/les_miserables.txt:15168:remained closed and drooping. Her whole person was trembling with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:15169:indescribable unfolding of wings, all ready to open wide and bear her
tests/les_miserables.txt:15170:away, which could be felt as they rustled, though they could not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:15176:The branch trembles when a hand approaches it to pluck a flower, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:15179:which the mysterious fingers of Death are about to pluck the soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15182:in turn upon the sick woman and the crucifix, as he had done two months
tests/les_miserables.txt:15183:before, on the day when he had come for the first time to see her in
tests/les_miserables.txt:15189:finger on his lips, as though there were some one in the chamber whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:15190:he must enjoin to silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15205:with so much certainty, with such a complete absence of disquiet and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15206:doubt, that he found not a word of reply. She continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15211:celestial forms.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15214:He raised his glance to the crucifix.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15216:“But,” she resumed, “tell me where Cosette is. Why did not you place
tests/les_miserables.txt:15220:He made some mechanical reply which he was never afterwards able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:15221:recall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15223:Fortunately, the doctor had been warned, and he now made his
tests/les_miserables.txt:15224:appearance. He came to the aid of M. Madeleine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15226:“Calm yourself, my child,” said the doctor; “your child is here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15229:Fantine’s eyes beamed and filled her whole face with light. She clasped
tests/les_miserables.txt:15230:her hands with an expression which contained all that is possible to
tests/les_miserables.txt:15231:prayer in the way of violence and tenderness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15233:“Oh!” she exclaimed, “bring her to me!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15236:Touching illusion of a mother! Cosette was, for her, still the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:15237:child who is carried.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15239:“Not yet,” said the doctor, “not just now. You still have some fever.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15240:The sight of your child would agitate you and do you harm. You must be
tests/les_miserables.txt:15241:cured first.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15246:“But I am cured! Oh, I tell you that I am cured! What an ass that
tests/les_miserables.txt:15247:doctor is! The idea! I want to see my child!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15250:“You see,” said the doctor, “how excited you become. So long as you are
tests/les_miserables.txt:15251:in this state I shall oppose your having your child. It is not enough
tests/les_miserables.txt:15252:to see her; it is necessary that you should live for her. When you are
tests/les_miserables.txt:15258:“I beg your pardon, doctor, I really beg your pardon. Formerly I should
tests/les_miserables.txt:15263:I have been seeing her; I have not taken my eyes from her since
tests/les_miserables.txt:15269:at me. When Monsieur le Docteur pleases, he shall bring me Cosette. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:15270:have no longer any fever; I am well. I am perfectly conscious that
tests/les_miserables.txt:15273:it is seen that I am very calm, they will say, ‘She must have her
tests/les_miserables.txt:15274:child.’”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15277:M. Madeleine was sitting on a chair beside the bed. She turned towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:15278:him; she was making a visible effort to be calm and “very good,” as she
tests/les_miserables.txt:15279:expressed it in the feebleness of illness which resembles infancy, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:15280:order that, seeing her so peaceable, they might make no difficulty
tests/les_miserables.txt:15281:about bringing Cosette to her. But while she controlled herself she
tests/les_miserables.txt:15282:could not refrain from questioning M. Madeleine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15286:journey well? Alas! she will not recognize me. She must have forgotten
tests/les_miserables.txt:15288:birds. A child sees one thing to-day and another thing to-morrow, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:15290:Thénardiers keep her clean? How have they fed her? Oh! if you only knew
tests/les_miserables.txt:15291:how I have suffered, putting such questions as that to myself during
tests/les_miserables.txt:15292:all the time of my wretchedness. Now, it is all past. I am happy. Oh,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15294:Maire? Is not my daughter beautiful? You must have been very cold in
tests/les_miserables.txt:15295:that diligence! Could she not be brought for just one little instant?
tests/les_miserables.txt:15296:She might be taken away directly afterwards. Tell me; you are the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15297:master; it could be so if you chose!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15301:You shall see her soon; but calm yourself; you are talking with too
tests/les_miserables.txt:15302:much vivacity, and you are throwing your arms out from under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15303:clothes, and that makes you cough.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15306:In fact, fits of coughing interrupted Fantine at nearly every word.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15309:passionate lamentations the confidence which she was desirous of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15315:cook-shop.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15319:anxiety; it was evident that he had come to tell her things before
tests/les_miserables.txt:15320:which his mind now hesitated. The doctor, having finished his visit,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15321:retired. Sister Simplice remained alone with them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15323:But in the midst of this pause Fantine exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15328:She stretched out her arm to enjoin silence about her, held her breath,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15331:There was a child playing in the yard—the child of the portress or of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15332:some work-woman. It was one of those accidents which are always
tests/les_miserables.txt:15333:occurring, and which seem to form a part of the mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:15334:stage-setting of mournful scenes. The child—a little girl—was going and
tests/les_miserables.txt:15335:coming, running to warm herself, laughing, singing at the top of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:15336:voice. Alas! in what are the plays of children not intermingled. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:15339:“Oh!” she resumed, “it is my Cosette! I recognize her voice.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15342:The child retreated as it had come; the voice died away. Fantine
tests/les_miserables.txt:15343:listened for a while longer, then her face clouded over, and M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15344:Madeleine heard her say, in a low voice: “How wicked that doctor is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:15345:to allow me to see my daughter! That man has an evil countenance, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:15349:But the smiling background of her thoughts came to the front again. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:15350:continued to talk to herself, with her head resting on the pillow: “How
tests/les_miserables.txt:15354:She will run over the grass after butterflies. I will watch her. Then
tests/les_miserables.txt:15355:she will take her first communion. Ah! when will she take her first
tests/les_miserables.txt:15356:communion?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15359:She began to reckon on her fingers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15362:have a white veil, and openwork stockings; she will look like a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:15363:woman. O my good sister, you do not know how foolish I become when I
tests/les_miserables.txt:15364:think of my daughter’s first communion!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15371:absorbed in reflection which had no bottom. All at once she ceased
tests/les_miserables.txt:15372:speaking, and this caused him to raise his head mechanically. Fantine
tests/les_miserables.txt:15373:had become terrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15376:a sitting posture, her thin shoulder emerged from her chemise; her
tests/les_miserables.txt:15377:face, which had been radiant but a moment before, was ghastly, and she
tests/les_miserables.txt:15381:“Good God!” he exclaimed; “what ails you, Fantine?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15384:She made no reply; she did not remove her eyes from the object which
tests/les_miserables.txt:15396:This is what had taken place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15398:The half-hour after midnight had just struck when M. Madeleine quitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:15400:out again by the mail-wagon, in which he had engaged his place. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:15401:little before six o’clock in the morning he had arrived at M. sur M.,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15402:and his first care had been to post a letter to M. Laffitte, then to
tests/les_miserables.txt:15405:However, he had hardly quitted the audience hall of the Court of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15406:Assizes, when the district-attorney, recovering from his first shock,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15408:sur M., to declare that his convictions had not been in the least
tests/les_miserables.txt:15409:modified by that curious incident, which would be explained thereafter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15410:and to demand, in the meantime, the condemnation of that Champmathieu,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15411:who was evidently the real Jean Valjean. The district-attorney’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:15412:persistence was visibly at variance with the sentiments of every one,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15413:of the public, of the court, and of the jury. The counsel for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15414:defence had some difficulty in refuting this harangue and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:15415:establishing that, in consequence of the revelations of M. Madeleine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15416:that is to say, of the real Jean Valjean, the aspect of the matter had
tests/les_miserables.txt:15418:only an innocent man. Thence the lawyer had drawn some epiphonemas, not
tests/les_miserables.txt:15419:very fresh, unfortunately, upon judicial errors, etc., etc.; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15420:President, in his summing up, had joined the counsel for the defence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15421:and in a few minutes the jury had thrown Champmathieu out of the case.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15423:Nevertheless, the district-attorney was bent on having a Jean Valjean;
tests/les_miserables.txt:15427:district-attorney shut himself up with the President. They conferred
tests/les_miserables.txt:15428:“as to the necessity of seizing the person of M. le Maire of M. sur M.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15429:This phrase, in which there was a great deal of _of_, is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15430:district-attorney’s, written with his own hand, on the minutes of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:15432:the President did not offer many objections. Justice must, after all,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15433:take its course. And then, when all was said, although the President
tests/les_miserables.txt:15435:a devoted and almost an ardent royalist, and he had been shocked to
tests/les_miserables.txt:15439:The order for his arrest was accordingly despatched. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:15440:district-attorney forwarded it to M. sur M. by a special messenger, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:15441:full speed, and entrusted its execution to Police Inspector Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15447:order of arrest and the command to produce the prisoner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15449:The messenger himself was a very clever member of the police, who, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:15450:two words, informed Javert of what had taken place at Arras. The order
tests/les_miserables.txt:15451:of arrest, signed by the district-attorney, was couched in these words:
tests/les_miserables.txt:15452:“Inspector Javert will apprehend the body of the Sieur Madeleine, mayor
tests/les_miserables.txt:15453:of M. sur M., who, in this day’s session of the court, was recognized
tests/les_miserables.txt:15454:as the liberated convict, Jean Valjean.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15457:Any one who did not know Javert, and who had chanced to see him at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15458:moment when he penetrated the antechamber of the infirmary, could have
tests/les_miserables.txt:15459:divined nothing of what had taken place, and would have thought his air
tests/les_miserables.txt:15460:the most ordinary in the world. He was cool, calm, grave, his gray hair
tests/les_miserables.txt:15461:was perfectly smooth upon his temples, and he had just mounted the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15463:acquainted with him, and who had examined him attentively at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15464:moment, would have shuddered. The buckle of his leather stock was under
tests/les_miserables.txt:15465:his left ear instead of at the nape of his neck. This betrayed unwonted
tests/les_miserables.txt:15468:Javert was a complete character, who never had a wrinkle in his duty or
tests/les_miserables.txt:15469:in his uniform; methodical with malefactors, rigid with the buttons of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15470:his coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15472:That he should have set the buckle of his stock awry, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:15473:indispensable that there should have taken place in him one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:15474:emotions which may be designated as internal earthquakes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15476:He had come in a simple way, had made a requisition on the neighboring
tests/les_miserables.txt:15477:post for a corporal and four soldiers, had left the soldiers in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15478:courtyard, had had Fantine’s room pointed out to him by the portress,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15479:who was utterly unsuspicious, accustomed as she was to seeing armed men
tests/les_miserables.txt:15482:On arriving at Fantine’s chamber, Javert turned the handle, pushed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15483:door open with the gentleness of a sick-nurse or a police spy, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:15486:Properly speaking, he did not enter. He stood erect in the half-open
tests/les_miserables.txt:15487:door, his hat on his head and his left hand thrust into his coat, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:15488:was buttoned up to the chin. In the bend of his elbow the leaden head
tests/les_miserables.txt:15489:of his enormous cane, which was hidden behind him, could be seen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15491:Thus he remained for nearly a minute, without his presence being
tests/les_miserables.txt:15492:perceived. All at once Fantine raised her eyes, saw him, and made M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15495:The instant that Madeleine’s glance encountered Javert’s glance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15497:approaching him, became terrible. No human sentiment can be as terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:15502:The satisfaction of at last getting hold of Jean Valjean caused all
tests/les_miserables.txt:15503:that was in his soul to appear in his countenance. The depths having
tests/les_miserables.txt:15504:been stirred up, mounted to the surface. The humiliation of having, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:15505:some slight degree, lost the scent, and of having indulged, for a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:15506:moments, in an error with regard to Champmathieu, was effaced by pride
tests/les_miserables.txt:15507:at having so well and accurately divined in the first place, and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15508:having for so long cherished a just instinct. Javert’s content shone
tests/les_miserables.txt:15510:that narrow brow. All the demonstrations of horror which a satisfied
tests/les_miserables.txt:15511:face can afford were there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15513:Javert was in heaven at that moment. Without putting the thing clearly
tests/les_miserables.txt:15514:to himself, but with a confused intuition of the necessity of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:15515:presence and of his success, he, Javert, personified justice, light,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15516:and truth in their celestial function of crushing out evil. Behind him
tests/les_miserables.txt:15517:and around him, at an infinite distance, he had authority, reason, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15518:case judged, the legal conscience, the public prosecution, all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15519:stars; he was protecting order, he was causing the law to yield up its
tests/les_miserables.txt:15520:thunders, he was avenging society, he was lending a helping hand to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15521:absolute, he was standing erect in the midst of a glory. There existed
tests/les_miserables.txt:15522:in his victory a remnant of defiance and of combat. Erect, haughty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15524:a ferocious archangel. The terrible shadow of the action which he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:15525:accomplishing caused the vague flash of the social sword to be visible
tests/les_miserables.txt:15526:in his clenched fist; happy and indignant, he held his heel upon crime,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15527:vice, rebellion, perdition, hell; he was radiant, he exterminated, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:15528:smiled, and there was an incontestable grandeur in this monstrous Saint
tests/les_miserables.txt:15529:Michael.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15533:Probity, sincerity, candor, conviction, the sense of duty, are things
tests/les_miserables.txt:15534:which may become hideous when wrongly directed; but which, even when
tests/les_miserables.txt:15535:hideous, remain grand: their majesty, the majesty peculiar to the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:15536:conscience, clings to them in the midst of horror; they are virtues
tests/les_miserables.txt:15537:which have one vice,—error. The honest, pitiless joy of a fanatic in
tests/les_miserables.txt:15538:the full flood of his atrocity preserves a certain lugubriously
tests/les_miserables.txt:15539:venerable radiance. Without himself suspecting the fact, Javert in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:15541:triumphs. Nothing could be so poignant and so terrible as this face,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15551:Fantine had not seen Javert since the day on which the mayor had torn
tests/les_miserables.txt:15552:her from the man. Her ailing brain comprehended nothing, but the only
tests/les_miserables.txt:15553:thing which she did not doubt was that he had come to get her. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:15554:could not endure that terrible face; she felt her life quitting her;
tests/les_miserables.txt:15555:she hid her face in both hands, and shrieked in her anguish:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15560:Jean Valjean—we shall henceforth not speak of him otherwise—had risen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15561:He said to Fantine in the gentlest and calmest of voices:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15563:“Be at ease; it is not for you that he is come.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15573:“Be quick about it!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15576:There lay in the inflection of voice which accompanied these words
tests/les_miserables.txt:15577:something indescribably fierce and frenzied. Javert did not say, “Be
tests/les_miserables.txt:15578:quick about it!” he said “Bequiabouit.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15581:No orthography can do justice to the accent with which it was uttered:
tests/les_miserables.txt:15584:He did not proceed according to his custom, he did not enter into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15586:was a sort of mysterious combatant, who was not to be laid hands upon,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15589:beginning, but an end. He confined himself to saying, “Be quick about
tests/les_miserables.txt:15593:As he spoke thus, he did not advance a single step; he hurled at Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:15594:Valjean a glance which he threw out like a grappling-hook, and with
tests/les_miserables.txt:15595:which he was accustomed to draw wretches violently to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15597:It was this glance which Fantine had felt penetrating to the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:15600:At Javert’s exclamation, Fantine opened her eyes once more. But the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15603:Javert advanced to the middle of the room, and cried:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15605:“See here now! Art thou coming?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15608:The unhappy woman glanced about her. No one was present excepting the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15609:nun and the mayor. To whom could that abject use of “thou” be
tests/les_miserables.txt:15612:Then she beheld a most unprecedented thing, a thing so unprecedented
tests/les_miserables.txt:15613:that nothing equal to it had appeared to her even in the blackest
tests/les_miserables.txt:15616:She beheld Javert, the police spy, seize the mayor by the collar; she
tests/les_miserables.txt:15617:saw the mayor bow his head. It seemed to her that the world was coming
tests/les_miserables.txt:15620:Javert had, in fact, grasped Jean Valjean by the collar.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15624:Javert burst out laughing with that frightful laugh which displayed all
tests/les_miserables.txt:15630:Jean Valjean made no attempt to disengage the hand which grasped the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15631:collar of his coat. He said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15636:Javert interrupted him: “Call me Mr. Inspector.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15658:“What difference does that make to me? I shall not listen.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15662:voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15664:“Grant me three days’ grace! three days in which to go and fetch the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15665:child of this unhappy woman. I will pay whatever is necessary. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:15666:shall accompany me if you choose.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15669:“You are making sport of me!” cried Javert. “Come now, I did not think
tests/les_miserables.txt:15670:you such a fool! You ask me to give you three days in which to run
tests/les_miserables.txt:15671:away! You say that it is for the purpose of fetching that creature’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:15672:child! Ah! Ah! That’s good! That’s really capital!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15677:“My child!” she cried, “to go and fetch my child! She is not here,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15678:then! Answer me, sister; where is Cosette? I want my child! Monsieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:15685:It’s a pretty sort of a place where convicts are magistrates, and where
tests/les_miserables.txt:15686:women of the town are cared for like countesses! Ah! But we are going
tests/les_miserables.txt:15687:to change all that; it is high time!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15690:He stared intently at Fantine, and added, once more taking into his
tests/les_miserables.txt:15691:grasp Jean Valjean’s cravat, shirt and collar:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15694:Monsieur le Maire. There is a thief, a brigand, a convict named Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:15701:speak; a rattle proceeded from the depths of her throat, her teeth
tests/les_miserables.txt:15702:chattered; she stretched out her arms in her agony, opening her hands
tests/les_miserables.txt:15703:convulsively, and fumbling about her like a drowning person; then
tests/les_miserables.txt:15704:suddenly fell back on her pillow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15706:Her head struck the head-board of the bed and fell forwards on her
tests/les_miserables.txt:15719:to listen to argument. Let us economize all that; the guard is below;
tests/les_miserables.txt:15720:march on instantly, or you’ll get the thumb-screws!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15723:In the corner of the room stood an old iron bedstead, which was in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15724:decidedly decrepit state, and which served the sisters as a camp-bed
tests/les_miserables.txt:15725:when they were watching with the sick. Jean Valjean stepped up to this
tests/les_miserables.txt:15726:bed, in a twinkling wrenched off the head-piece, which was already in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15727:dilapidated condition, an easy matter to muscles like his, grasped the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15728:principal rod like a bludgeon, and glanced at Javert. Javert retreated
tests/les_miserables.txt:15730:slowly up to Fantine’s couch. When he arrived there he turned and said
tests/les_miserables.txt:15731:to Javert, in a voice that was barely audible:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15736:One thing is certain, and that is, that Javert trembled.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15738:It did occur to him to summon the guard, but Jean Valjean might avail
tests/les_miserables.txt:15739:himself of that moment to effect his escape; so he remained, grasped
tests/les_miserables.txt:15740:his cane by the small end, and leaned against the door-post, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:15744:his brow on his hand, and began to contemplate the motionless body of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15745:Fantine, which lay extended there. He remained thus, mute, absorbed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15746:evidently with no further thought of anything connected with this life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15747:Upon his face and in his attitude there was nothing but inexpressible
tests/les_miserables.txt:15749:and spoke to her in a low voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15751:What did he say to her? What could this man, who was reproved, say to
tests/les_miserables.txt:15753:them. Did the dead woman hear them? There are some touching illusions
tests/les_miserables.txt:15754:which are, perhaps, sublime realities. The point as to which there
tests/les_miserables.txt:15755:exists no doubt is, that Sister Simplice, the sole witness of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15756:incident, often said that at the moment that Jean Valjean whispered in
tests/les_miserables.txt:15757:Fantine’s ear, she distinctly beheld an ineffable smile dawn on those
tests/les_miserables.txt:15762:the pillow as a mother might have done for her child; then he tied the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15763:string of her chemise, and smoothed her hair back under her cap. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:15764:done, he closed her eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15766:Fantine’s face seemed strangely illuminated at that moment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15768:Death, that signifies entrance into the great light.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15784:Javert deposited Jean Valjean in the city prison.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15786:The arrest of M. Madeleine occasioned a sensation, or rather, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:15787:extraordinary commotion in M. sur M. We are sorry that we cannot
tests/les_miserables.txt:15788:conceal the fact, that at the single word, “He was a convict,” nearly
tests/les_miserables.txt:15790:done had been forgotten, and he was nothing but a “convict from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15791:galleys.” It is just to add that the details of what had taken place at
tests/les_miserables.txt:15792:Arras were not yet known. All day long conversations like the following
tests/les_miserables.txt:15795:“You don’t know? He was a liberated convict!” “Who?” “The mayor.” “Bah!
tests/les_miserables.txt:15798:been arrested.” “Arrested!” “In prison, in the city prison, while
tests/les_miserables.txt:15801:Assizes for a highway robbery which he committed long ago.” “Well! I
tests/les_miserables.txt:15802:suspected as much. That man was too good, too perfect, too affected. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:15803:refused the cross; he bestowed sous on all the little scamps he came
tests/les_miserables.txt:15804:across. I always thought there was some evil history back of all that.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15807:The “drawing-rooms” particularly abounded in remarks of this nature.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15809:One old lady, a subscriber to the _Drapeau Blanc_, made the following
tests/les_miserables.txt:15810:remark, the depth of which it is impossible to fathom:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15815:It was thus that the phantom which had been called M. Madeleine
tests/les_miserables.txt:15821:lodge, still in a thorough fright, and absorbed in sad reflections. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:15822:factory had been closed all day, the carriage gate was bolted, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15824:Sister Perpétue and Sister Simplice, who were watching beside the body
tests/les_miserables.txt:15827:Towards the hour when M. Madeleine was accustomed to return home, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15828:good portress rose mechanically, took from a drawer the key of M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15829:Madeleine’s chamber, and the flat candlestick which he used every
tests/les_miserables.txt:15831:whence he was accustomed to take it, and set the candlestick on one
tests/les_miserables.txt:15832:side, as though she was expecting him. Then she sat down again on her
tests/les_miserables.txt:15833:chair, and became absorbed in thought once more. The poor, good old
tests/les_miserables.txt:15834:woman had done all this without being conscious of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15837:her reverie, and exclaimed, “Hold! My good God Jesus! And I hung his
tests/les_miserables.txt:15842:through, seized the key and the candlestick, and lighted the taper at
tests/les_miserables.txt:15843:the candle which was burning there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15846:shriek which she confined to her throat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15848:She knew that hand, that arm, the sleeve of that coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15852:It was several seconds before she could speak; she had a _seizure_, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:15855:“Good God, Monsieur le Maire,” she cried at last, “I thought you were—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:15858:She stopped; the conclusion of her sentence would have been lacking in
tests/les_miserables.txt:15859:respect towards the beginning. Jean Valjean was still Monsieur le Maire
tests/les_miserables.txt:15866:going up to my room; go and find Sister Simplice for me. She is with
tests/les_miserables.txt:15875:No one ever found out how he had managed to get into the courtyard
tests/les_miserables.txt:15876:without opening the big gates. He had, and always carried about him, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15877:pass-key which opened a little side-door; but he must have been
tests/les_miserables.txt:15878:searched, and his latch-key must have been taken from him. This point
tests/les_miserables.txt:15881:He ascended the staircase leading to his chamber. On arriving at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15882:top, he left his candle on the top step of his stairs, opened his door
tests/les_miserables.txt:15883:with very little noise, went and closed his window and his shutters by
tests/les_miserables.txt:15884:feeling, then returned for his candle and re-entered his room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15886:It was a useful precaution; it will be recollected that his window
tests/les_miserables.txt:15887:could be seen from the street.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15889:He cast a glance about him, at his table, at his chair, at his bed
tests/les_miserables.txt:15890:which had not been disturbed for three days. No trace of the disorder
tests/les_miserables.txt:15892:only she had picked out of the ashes and placed neatly on the table the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15893:two iron ends of the cudgel and the forty-sou piece which had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:15894:blackened by the fire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15896:He took a sheet of paper, on which he wrote: “These are the two tips of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15897:my iron-shod cudgel and the forty-sou piece stolen from Little Gervais,
tests/les_miserables.txt:15898:which I mentioned at the Court of Assizes,” and he arranged this piece
tests/les_miserables.txt:15899:of paper, the bits of iron, and the coin in such a way that they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:15900:the first things to be seen on entering the room. From a cupboard he
tests/les_miserables.txt:15901:pulled out one of his old shirts, which he tore in pieces. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15902:strips of linen thus prepared he wrapped the two silver candlesticks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15904:the Bishop’s candlesticks, he nibbled at a piece of black bread. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:15905:probably the prison-bread which he had carried with him in his flight.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15907:This was proved by the crumbs which were found on the floor of the room
tests/les_miserables.txt:15910:There came two taps at the door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15914:It was Sister Simplice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15916:She was pale; her eyes were red; the candle which she carried trembled
tests/les_miserables.txt:15917:in her hand. The peculiar feature of the violences of destiny is, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:15918:however polished or cool we may be, they wring human nature from our
tests/les_miserables.txt:15919:very bowels, and force it to reappear on the surface. The emotions of
tests/les_miserables.txt:15920:that day had turned the nun into a woman once more. She had wept, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:15923:Jean Valjean had just finished writing a few lines on a paper, which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:15928:The paper was not folded. She cast a glance upon it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15930:“You can read it,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15940:inarticulate sounds. She succeeded in saying, however:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15950:He had hardly finished when a loud noise became audible on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15951:staircase. They heard a tumult of ascending footsteps, and the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:15952:portress saying in her loudest and most piercing tones:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:15964:They recognized Javert’s voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15966:The chamber was so arranged that the door in opening masked the corner
tests/les_miserables.txt:15967:of the wall on the right. Jean Valjean blew out the light and placed
tests/les_miserables.txt:15968:himself in this angle. Sister Simplice fell on her knees near the
tests/les_miserables.txt:15976:audible in the corridor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15980:The candle was on the chimney-piece, and gave but very little light.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15982:Javert caught sight of the nun and halted in amazement.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15986:This was impregnable, and admitted of neither objection nor
tests/les_miserables.txt:15987:restriction. In his eyes, of course, the ecclesiastical authority was
tests/les_miserables.txt:15988:the chief of all; he was religious, superficial and correct on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:15990:makes a mistake; a nun was a creature who never sins; they were souls
tests/les_miserables.txt:15991:walled in from this world, with a single door which never opened except
tests/les_miserables.txt:15994:On perceiving the sister, his first movement was to retire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:15996:But there was also another duty which bound him and impelled him
tests/les_miserables.txt:15997:imperiously in the opposite direction. His second movement was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16000:This was Sister Simplice, who had never told a lie in her life. Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:16001:knew it, and held her in special veneration in consequence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16006:A terrible moment ensued, during which the poor portress felt as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:16014:“Then,” resumed Javert, “you will excuse me if I persist; it is my
tests/les_miserables.txt:16015:duty; you have not seen a certain person—a man—this evening? He has
tests/les_miserables.txt:16016:escaped; we are in search of him—that Jean Valjean; you have not seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:16025:She lied. She had lied twice in succession, one after the other,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16026:without hesitation, promptly, as a person does when sacrificing
tests/les_miserables.txt:16033:may this lie be counted to your credit in paradise!
tests/les_miserables.txt:16035:The sister’s affirmation was for Javert so decisive a thing that he did
tests/les_miserables.txt:16036:not even observe the singularity of that candle which had but just been
tests/les_miserables.txt:16037:extinguished, and which was still smoking on the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16039:An hour later, a man, marching amid trees and mists, was rapidly
tests/les_miserables.txt:16040:departing from M. sur M. in the direction of Paris. That man was Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:16042:carters who met him, that he was carrying a bundle; that he was dressed
tests/les_miserables.txt:16044:But an aged workman had died in the infirmary of the factory a few days
tests/les_miserables.txt:16050:We all have a mother,—the earth. Fantine was given back to that mother.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16052:The curé thought that he was doing right, and perhaps he really was, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:16053:reserving as much money as possible from what Jean Valjean had left for
tests/les_miserables.txt:16054:the poor. Who was concerned, after all? A convict and a woman of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16055:town. That is why he had a very simple funeral for Fantine, and reduced
tests/les_miserables.txt:16056:it to that strictly necessary form known as the pauper’s grave.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16058:So Fantine was buried in the free corner of the cemetery which belongs
tests/les_miserables.txt:16061:among the first bones that came to hand; she was subjected to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16062:promiscuousness of ashes. She was thrown into the public grave. Her
tests/les_miserables.txt:16067:[Illustration: Frontispiece Volume Two]
tests/les_miserables.txt:16089:who is telling this story, was coming from Nivelles, and directing his
tests/les_miserables.txt:16090:course towards La Hulpe. He was on foot. He was pursuing a broad paved
tests/les_miserables.txt:16091:road, which undulated between two rows of trees, over the hills which
tests/les_miserables.txt:16092:succeed each other, raise the road and let it fall again, and produce
tests/les_miserables.txt:16095:He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac. In the west he perceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:16096:the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l’Alleud, which has the form of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16097:reversed vase. He had just left behind a wood upon an eminence; and at
tests/les_miserables.txt:16098:the angle of the crossroad, by the side of a sort of mouldy gibbet
tests/les_miserables.txt:16099:bearing the inscription _Ancient Barrier No. 4_, a public house,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16101:_Échabeau, Private Café_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16104:valley, where there is water which passes beneath an arch made through
tests/les_miserables.txt:16105:the embankment of the road. The clump of sparsely planted but very
tests/les_miserables.txt:16106:green trees, which fills the valley on one side of the road, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:16107:dispersed over the meadows on the other, and disappears gracefully and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16108:as in order in the direction of Braine-l’Alleud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16110:On the right, close to the road, was an inn, with a four-wheeled cart
tests/les_miserables.txt:16115:of some outside spectacle, such as a parish festival, was fluttering in
tests/les_miserables.txt:16116:the wind. At one corner of the inn, beside a pool in which a flotilla
tests/les_miserables.txt:16117:of ducks was navigating, a badly paved path plunged into the bushes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16118:The wayfarer struck into this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16120:After traversing a hundred paces, skirting a wall of the fifteenth
tests/les_miserables.txt:16121:century, surmounted by a pointed gable, with bricks set in contrast, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:16122:found himself before a large door of arched stone, with a rectilinear
tests/les_miserables.txt:16124:medallions. A severe façade rose above this door; a wall, perpendicular
tests/les_miserables.txt:16125:to the façade, almost touched the door, and flanked it with an abrupt
tests/les_miserables.txt:16127:which, in disorder, grew all the flowers of May. The door was closed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16128:The two decrepit leaves which barred it were ornamented with an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:16129:rusty knocker.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16131:The sun was charming; the branches had that soft shivering of May,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16132:which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:16133:brave little bird, probably a lover, was carolling in a distracted
tests/les_miserables.txt:16136:The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16143:She saw the wayfarer, and perceived what he was looking at.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16145:“It was a French cannon-ball which made that,” she said to him. And she
tests/les_miserables.txt:16148:“That which you see there, higher up in the door, near a nail, is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16149:hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg. The bullet did not pierce
tests/les_miserables.txt:16153:“What is the name of this place?” inquired the wayfarer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16157:The traveller straightened himself up. He walked on a few paces, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16159:the trees, he perceived a sort of little elevation, and on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:16160:elevation something which at that distance resembled a lion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16170:Hougomont,—this was a funereal spot, the beginning of the obstacle, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16171:first resistance, which that great wood-cutter of Europe, called
tests/les_miserables.txt:16172:Napoleon, encountered at Waterloo, the first knot under the blows of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16175:It was a château; it is no longer anything but a farm. For the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16177:of Somerel, the same who endowed the sixth chaplaincy of the Abbey of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16180:The traveller pushed open the door, elbowed an ancient calash under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16181:porch, and entered the courtyard.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16183:The first thing which struck him in this paddock was a door of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16184:sixteenth century, which here simulates an arcade, everything else
tests/les_miserables.txt:16185:having fallen prostrate around it. A monumental aspect often has its
tests/les_miserables.txt:16186:birth in ruin. In a wall near the arcade opens another arched door, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16187:the time of Henry IV., permitting a glimpse of the trees of an orchard;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16188:beside this door, a manure-hole, some pickaxes, some shovels, some
tests/les_miserables.txt:16189:carts, an old well, with its flagstone and its iron reel, a chicken
tests/les_miserables.txt:16190:jumping, and a turkey spreading its tail, a chapel surmounted by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16192:the wall of the chapel—behold the court, the conquest of which was one
tests/les_miserables.txt:16193:of Napoleon’s dreams. This corner of earth, could he but have seized
tests/les_miserables.txt:16194:it, would, perhaps, have given him the world likewise. Chickens are
tests/les_miserables.txt:16195:scattering its dust abroad with their beaks. A growl is audible; it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:16196:a huge dog, who shows his teeth and replaces the English.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16198:The English behaved admirably there. Cooke’s four companies of guards
tests/les_miserables.txt:16201:Hougomont viewed on the map, as a geometrical plan, comprising
tests/les_miserables.txt:16202:buildings and enclosures, presents a sort of irregular rectangle, one
tests/les_miserables.txt:16203:angle of which is nicked out. It is this angle which contains the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16204:southern door, guarded by this wall, which commands it only a gun’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:16206:château; and the northern door, belonging to the farm. Napoleon sent
tests/les_miserables.txt:16208:Guilleminot, and Bachelu hurled themselves against it; nearly the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16209:entire corps of Reille was employed against it, and miscarried;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16210:Kellermann’s balls were exhausted on this heroic section of wall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16211:Bauduin’s brigade was not strong enough to force Hougomont on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16212:north, and the brigade of Soye could not do more than effect the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16213:beginning of a breach on the south, but without taking it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16215:The farm buildings border the courtyard on the south. A bit of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16216:north door, broken by the French, hangs suspended to the wall. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:16217:consists of four planks nailed to two cross-beams, on which the scars
tests/les_miserables.txt:16218:of the attack are visible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16220:The northern door, which was beaten in by the French, and which has had
tests/les_miserables.txt:16221:a piece applied to it to replace the panel suspended on the wall,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16222:stands half-open at the bottom of the paddock; it is cut squarely in
tests/les_miserables.txt:16223:the wall, built of stone below, of brick above which closes in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16224:courtyard on the north. It is a simple door for carts, such as exist in
tests/les_miserables.txt:16225:all farms, with the two large leaves made of rustic planks: beyond lie
tests/les_miserables.txt:16226:the meadows. The dispute over this entrance was furious. For a long
tests/les_miserables.txt:16230:The storm of the combat still lingers in this courtyard; its horror is
tests/les_miserables.txt:16231:visible there; the confusion of the fray was petrified there; it lives
tests/les_miserables.txt:16233:agony, the stones fall; the breaches cry aloud; the holes are wounds;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16236:This courtyard was more built up in 1815 than it is to-day. Buildings
tests/les_miserables.txt:16237:which have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16239:The English barricaded themselves there; the French made their way in,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16240:but could not stand their ground. Beside the chapel, one wing of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16241:château, the only ruin now remaining of the manor of Hougomont, rises
tests/les_miserables.txt:16242:in a crumbling state,—disembowelled, one might say. The château served
tests/les_miserables.txt:16243:for a dungeon, the chapel for a block-house. There men exterminated
tests/les_miserables.txt:16244:each other. The French, fired on from every point,—from behind the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16245:walls, from the summits of the garrets, from the depths of the cellars,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16246:through all the casements, through all the air-holes, through every
tests/les_miserables.txt:16247:crack in the stones,—fetched fagots and set fire to walls and men; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16248:reply to the grape-shot was a conflagration.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16251:dismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16253:staircase, cracked from the ground floor to the very roof, appears like
tests/les_miserables.txt:16254:the inside of a broken shell. The staircase has two stories; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16255:English, besieged on the staircase, and massed on its upper steps, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:16256:cut off the lower steps. These consisted of large slabs of blue stone,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16257:which form a heap among the nettles. Half a score of steps still cling
tests/les_miserables.txt:16258:to the wall; on the first is cut the figure of a trident. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:16259:inaccessible steps are solid in their niches. All the rest resembles a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16260:jaw which has been denuded of its teeth. There are two old trees there:
tests/les_miserables.txt:16261:one is dead; the other is wounded at its base, and is clothed with
tests/les_miserables.txt:16262:verdure in April. Since 1815 it has taken to growing through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16263:staircase.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16265:A massacre took place in the chapel. The interior, which has recovered
tests/les_miserables.txt:16266:its calm, is singular. The mass has not been said there since the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16267:carnage. Nevertheless, the altar has been left there—an altar of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16268:unpolished wood, placed against a background of roughhewn stone. Four
tests/les_miserables.txt:16269:whitewashed walls, a door opposite the altar, two small arched windows;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16270:over the door a large wooden crucifix, below the crucifix a square
tests/les_miserables.txt:16271:air-hole stopped up with a bundle of hay; on the ground, in one corner,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16272:an old window-frame with the glass all broken to pieces—such is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16273:chapel. Near the altar there is nailed up a wooden statue of Saint
tests/les_miserables.txt:16274:Anne, of the fifteenth century; the head of the infant Jesus has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:16275:carried off by a large ball. The French, who were masters of the chapel
tests/les_miserables.txt:16277:filled this building; it was a perfect furnace; the door was burned,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16279:upon his feet, of which only the blackened stumps are now to be seen;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16280:then it stopped,—a miracle, according to the assertion of the people of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16281:the neighborhood. The infant Jesus, decapitated, was less fortunate
tests/les_miserables.txt:16284:The walls are covered with inscriptions. Near the feet of Christ this
tests/les_miserables.txt:16286:Marques y Marquesa de Almagro (Habana)_. There are French names with
tests/les_miserables.txt:16287:exclamation points,—a sign of wrath. The wall was freshly whitewashed
tests/les_miserables.txt:16288:in 1849. The nations insulted each other there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16290:It was at the door of this chapel that the corpse was picked up which
tests/les_miserables.txt:16291:held an axe in its hand; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16293:On emerging from the chapel, a well is visible on the left. There are
tests/les_miserables.txt:16294:two in this courtyard. One inquires, Why is there no bucket and pulley
tests/les_miserables.txt:16295:to this? It is because water is no longer drawn there. Why is water not
tests/les_miserables.txt:16296:drawn there? Because it is full of skeletons.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16300:there. On the 18th of June, 1815, his family fled and concealed
tests/les_miserables.txt:16304:unfortunate people who had been scattered abroad, for many days and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16305:nights. There are at this day certain traces recognizable, such as old
tests/les_miserables.txt:16306:boles of burned trees, which mark the site of these poor bivouacs
tests/les_miserables.txt:16307:trembling in the depths of the thickets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16309:Guillaume van Kylsom remained at Hougomont, “to guard the château,” and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16310:concealed himself in the cellar. The English discovered him there. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:16311:tore him from his hiding-place, and the combatants forced this
tests/les_miserables.txt:16319:has a fashion of harassing victory, and she causes the pest to follow
tests/les_miserables.txt:16320:glory. The typhus is a concomitant of triumph. This well was deep, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16321:it was turned into a sepulchre. Three hundred dead bodies were cast
tests/les_miserables.txt:16322:into it. With too much haste perhaps. Were they all dead? Legend says
tests/les_miserables.txt:16323:they were not. It seems that on the night succeeding the interment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16324:feeble voices were heard calling from the well.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16326:This well is isolated in the middle of the courtyard. Three walls, part
tests/les_miserables.txt:16327:stone, part brick, and simulating a small, square tower, and folded
tests/les_miserables.txt:16328:like the leaves of a screen, surround it on all sides. The fourth side
tests/les_miserables.txt:16331:This little tower had a platform, of which only the beams remain. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:16332:iron supports of the well on the right form a cross. On leaning over,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16333:the eye is lost in a deep cylinder of brick which is filled with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16335:concealed in a growth of nettles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16337:This well has not in front of it that large blue slab which forms the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16338:table for all wells in Belgium. The slab has here been replaced by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16339:cross-beam, against which lean five or six shapeless fragments of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16340:knotty and petrified wood which resemble huge bones. There is no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:16341:either pail, chain, or pulley; but there is still the stone basin which
tests/les_miserables.txt:16342:served the overflow. The rain-water collects there, and from time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16343:time a bird of the neighboring forests comes thither to drink, and then
tests/les_miserables.txt:16345:The door of this house opens on the courtyard. Upon this door, beside a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16346:pretty Gothic lock-plate, there is an iron handle with trefoils placed
tests/les_miserables.txt:16348:this handle in order to take refuge in the farm, a French sapper hewed
tests/les_miserables.txt:16351:The family who occupy the house had for their grandfather Guillaume van
tests/les_miserables.txt:16352:Kylsom, the old gardener, dead long since. A woman with gray hair said
tests/les_miserables.txt:16354:was terrified and wept. They carried us off to the woods. I went there
tests/les_miserables.txt:16356:the cannon, and went _boum! boum!_”
tests/les_miserables.txt:16359:A door opening from the courtyard on the left led into the orchard, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:16360:we were told. The orchard is terrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16362:It is in three parts; one might almost say, in three acts. The first
tests/les_miserables.txt:16363:part is a garden, the second is an orchard, the third is a wood. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:16364:three parts have a common enclosure: on the side of the entrance, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16365:buildings of the château and the farm; on the left, a hedge; on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16367:brick, the wall at the bottom is of stone. One enters the garden first.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16368:It slopes downwards, is planted with gooseberry bushes, choked with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16369:wild growth of vegetation, and terminated by a monumental terrace of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16370:cut stone, with balustrade with a double curve.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16372:It was a seignorial garden in the first French style which preceded Le
tests/les_miserables.txt:16374:globes which resemble cannon-balls of stone. Forty-three balusters can
tests/les_miserables.txt:16375:still be counted on their sockets; the rest lie prostrate in the grass.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16376:Almost all bear scratches of bullets. One broken baluster is placed on
tests/les_miserables.txt:16377:the pediment like a fractured leg.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16379:It was in this garden, further down than the orchard, that six
tests/les_miserables.txt:16381:unable to escape, hunted down and caught like bears in their dens,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16382:accepted the combat with two Hanoverian companies, one of which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16383:armed with carbines. The Hanoverians lined this balustrade and fired
tests/les_miserables.txt:16385:hundred, intrepid and with no shelter save the currant-bushes, took a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16388:One mounts a few steps and passes from the garden into the orchard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16391:ready to renew the combat. Thirty-eight loopholes, pierced by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16393:are placed two English tombs of granite. There are loopholes only in
tests/les_miserables.txt:16394:the south wall, as the principal attack came from that quarter. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:16395:wall is hidden on the outside by a tall hedge; the French came up,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16396:thinking that they had to deal only with a hedge, crossed it, and found
tests/les_miserables.txt:16397:the wall both an obstacle and an ambuscade, with the English guards
tests/les_miserables.txt:16398:behind it, the thirty-eight loopholes firing at once a shower of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16402:Nevertheless, the orchard was taken. As they had no ladders, the French
tests/les_miserables.txt:16403:scaled it with their nails. They fought hand to hand amid the trees.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16406:which Kellermann’s two batteries were trained, is gnawed by grape-shot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16408:This orchard is sentient, like others, in the month of May. It has its
tests/les_miserables.txt:16409:buttercups and its daisies; the grass is tall there; the cart-horses
tests/les_miserables.txt:16410:browse there; cords of hair, on which linen is drying, traverse the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16411:spaces between the trees and force the passer-by to bend his head; one
tests/les_miserables.txt:16412:walks over this uncultivated land, and one’s foot dives into
tests/les_miserables.txt:16414:tree-bole which lies there all verdant. Major Blackmann leaned against
tests/les_miserables.txt:16416:general, Duplat, descended from a French family which fled on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16417:revocation of the Edict of Nantes. An aged and falling apple-tree leans
tests/les_miserables.txt:16419:clayey loam. Nearly all the apple-trees are falling with age. There is
tests/les_miserables.txt:16420:not one which has not had its bullet or its biscayan.6 The skeletons of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16421:dead trees abound in this orchard. Crows fly through their branches,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16424:Bauduin killed, Foy wounded, conflagration, massacre, carnage, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16425:rivulet formed of English blood, French blood, German blood mingled in
tests/les_miserables.txt:16426:fury, a well crammed with corpses, the regiment of Nassau and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16427:regiment of Brunswick destroyed, Duplat killed, Blackmann killed, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16428:English Guards mutilated, twenty French battalions, besides the forty
tests/les_miserables.txt:16429:from Reille’s corps, decimated, three thousand men in that hovel of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16430:Hougomont alone cut down, slashed to pieces, shot, burned, with their
tests/les_miserables.txt:16431:throats cut,—and all this so that a peasant can say to-day to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16432:traveller: _Monsieur, give me three francs, and if you like, I will
tests/les_miserables.txt:16441:Let us turn back,—that is one of the story-teller’s rights,—and put
tests/les_miserables.txt:16442:ourselves once more in the year 1815, and even a little earlier than
tests/les_miserables.txt:16443:the epoch when the action narrated in the first part of this book took
tests/les_miserables.txt:16444:place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16448:of water, more or less, decided the downfall of Napoleon. All that
tests/les_miserables.txt:16449:Providence required in order to make Waterloo the end of Austerlitz was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16450:a little more rain, and a cloud traversing the sky out of season
tests/les_miserables.txt:16451:sufficed to make a world crumble.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16453:The battle of Waterloo could not be begun until half-past eleven
tests/les_miserables.txt:16454:o’clock, and that gave Blücher time to come up. Why? Because the ground
tests/les_miserables.txt:16455:was wet. The artillery had to wait until it became a little firmer
tests/les_miserables.txt:16456:before they could manœuvre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16458:Napoleon was an artillery officer, and felt the effects of this. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:16459:foundation of this wonderful captain was the man who, in the report to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16460:the Directory on Aboukir, said: _Such a one of our balls killed six
tests/les_miserables.txt:16461:men_. All his plans of battle were arranged for projectiles. The key to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16462:his victory was to make the artillery converge on one point. He treated
tests/les_miserables.txt:16463:the strategy of the hostile general like a citadel, and made a breach
tests/les_miserables.txt:16465:dissolved battles with cannon. There was something of the sharpshooter
tests/les_miserables.txt:16467:lines, to crush and disperse masses,—for him everything lay in this, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16468:strike, strike, strike incessantly,—and he intrusted this task to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16469:cannon-ball. A redoubtable method, and one which, united with genius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16470:rendered this gloomy athlete of the pugilism of war invincible for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16471:space of fifteen years.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16474:because he had numbers on his side. Wellington had only one hundred and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16477:Suppose the soil dry, and the artillery capable of moving, the action
tests/les_miserables.txt:16478:would have begun at six o’clock in the morning. The battle would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:16479:been won and ended at two o’clock, three hours before the change of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16480:fortune in favor of the Prussians. What amount of blame attaches to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16481:Napoleon for the loss of this battle? Is the shipwreck due to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16484:Was it the evident physical decline of Napoleon that complicated this
tests/les_miserables.txt:16485:epoch by an inward diminution of force? Had the twenty years of war
tests/les_miserables.txt:16486:worn out the blade as it had worn the scabbard, the soul as well as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16489:suffering from an eclipse? Did he go into a frenzy in order to disguise
tests/les_miserables.txt:16491:delusion of a breath of adventure? Had he become—a grave matter in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16492:general—unconscious of peril? Is there an age, in this class of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16493:material great men, who may be called the giants of action, when genius
tests/les_miserables.txt:16495:for the Dantes and Michael Angelos to grow old is to grow in greatness;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16497:lost the direct sense of victory? Had he reached the point where he
tests/les_miserables.txt:16498:could no longer recognize the reef, could no longer divine the snare,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16499:no longer discern the crumbling brink of abysses? Had he lost his power
tests/les_miserables.txt:16500:of scenting out catastrophes? He who had in former days known all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16501:roads to triumph, and who, from the summit of his chariot of lightning,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16502:pointed them out with a sovereign finger, had he now reached that state
tests/les_miserables.txt:16503:of sinister amazement when he could lead his tumultuous legions
tests/les_miserables.txt:16504:harnessed to it, to the precipice? Was he seized at the age of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16505:forty-six with a supreme madness? Was that titanic charioteer of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16510:His plan of battle was, by the confession of all, a masterpiece. To go
tests/les_miserables.txt:16511:straight to the centre of the Allies’ line, to make a breach in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16512:enemy, to cut them in two, to drive the British half back on Hal, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16514:Wellington and Blücher, to carry Mont-Saint-Jean, to seize Brussels, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16516:this was contained in that battle, according to Napoleon. Afterwards
tests/les_miserables.txt:16519:Of course, we do not here pretend to furnish a history of the battle of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16520:Waterloo; one of the scenes of the foundation of the story which we are
tests/les_miserables.txt:16521:relating is connected with this battle, but this history is not our
tests/les_miserables.txt:16522:subject; this history, moreover, has been finished, and finished in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16528:made of human flesh, taking appearances for realities, perchance; we
tests/les_miserables.txt:16529:have no right to oppose, in the name of science, a collection of facts
tests/les_miserables.txt:16530:which contain illusions, no doubt; we possess neither military practice
tests/les_miserables.txt:16531:nor strategic ability which authorize a system; in our opinion, a chain
tests/les_miserables.txt:16532:of accidents dominated the two leaders at Waterloo; and when it becomes
tests/les_miserables.txt:16533:a question of destiny, that mysterious culprit, we judge like that
tests/les_miserables.txt:16534:ingenious judge, the populace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16542:Those persons who wish to gain a clear idea of the battle of Waterloo
tests/les_miserables.txt:16543:have only to place, mentally, on the ground, a capital A. The left limb
tests/les_miserables.txt:16548:Jérôme Bonaparte; the right tip is the Belle-Alliance, where Napoleon
tests/les_miserables.txt:16549:was. At the centre of this chord is the precise point where the final
tests/les_miserables.txt:16550:word of the battle was pronounced. It was there that the lion has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:16551:placed, the involuntary symbol of the supreme heroism of the Imperial
tests/les_miserables.txt:16554:The triangle included in the top of the A, between the two limbs and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16556:plateau constituted the whole battle. The wings of the two armies
tests/les_miserables.txt:16558:Nivelles; d’Erlon facing Picton, Reille facing Hill.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16563:As for the plain itself, let the reader picture to himself a vast
tests/les_miserables.txt:16564:undulating sweep of ground; each rise commands the next rise, and all
tests/les_miserables.txt:16570:up the other. They clutch at everything: a bush is a point of support;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16571:an angle of the wall offers them a rest to the shoulder; for the lack
tests/les_miserables.txt:16572:of a hovel under whose cover they can draw up, a regiment yields its
tests/les_miserables.txt:16573:ground; an unevenness in the ground, a chance turn in the landscape, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16574:cross-path encountered at the right moment, a grove, a ravine, can stay
tests/les_miserables.txt:16575:the heel of that colossus which is called an army, and prevent its
tests/les_miserables.txt:16576:retreat. He who quits the field is beaten; hence the necessity
tests/les_miserables.txt:16578:insignificant clump of trees, and of studying deeply the slightest
tests/les_miserables.txt:16582:now called the plain of Waterloo. In the preceding year, Wellington,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16583:with the sagacity of foresight, had examined it as the possible seat of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16586:was stationed above, the French army below.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16588:It is almost superfluous here to sketch the appearance of Napoleon on
tests/les_miserables.txt:16589:horseback, glass in hand, upon the heights of Rossomme, at daybreak, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:16590:June 18, 1815. All the world has seen him before we can show him. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:16591:calm profile under the little three-cornered hat of the school of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16592:Brienne, that green uniform, the white revers concealing the star of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16593:the Legion of Honor, his great coat hiding his epaulets, the corner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16595:white horse with the saddle-cloth of purple velvet bearing on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16596:corners crowned N’s and eagles, Hessian boots over silk stockings,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16598:the Cæsars is present to all imaginations, saluted with acclamations by
tests/les_miserables.txt:16602:a certain legendary dimness evolved by the majority of heroes, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16603:which always veils the truth for a longer or shorter time; but to-day
tests/les_miserables.txt:16606:That light called history is pitiless; it possesses this peculiar and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16607:divine quality, that, pure light as it is, and precisely because it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:16608:wholly light, it often casts a shadow in places where people had
tests/les_miserables.txt:16609:hitherto beheld rays; from the same man it constructs two different
tests/les_miserables.txt:16610:phantoms, and the one attacks the other and executes justice on it, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16611:the shadows of the despot contend with the brilliancy of the leader.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16612:Hence arises a truer measure in the definitive judgments of nations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16613:Babylon violated lessens Alexander, Rome enchained lessens Cæsar,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16615:misfortune for a man to leave behind him the night which bears his
tests/les_miserables.txt:16624:Every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16625:beginning which was troubled, uncertain, hesitating, menacing to both
tests/les_miserables.txt:16626:armies, but still more so for the English than for the French.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16628:It had rained all night, the earth had been cut up by the downpour, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16629:water had accumulated here and there in the hollows of the plain as if
tests/les_miserables.txt:16630:in casks; at some points the gear of the artillery carriages was buried
tests/les_miserables.txt:16631:up to the axles, the circingles of the horses were dripping with liquid
tests/les_miserables.txt:16632:mud. If the wheat and rye trampled down by this cohort of transports on
tests/les_miserables.txt:16633:the march had not filled in the ruts and strewn a litter beneath the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16634:wheels, all movement, particularly in the valleys, in the direction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16640:been his wish to wait until the horse batteries could move and gallop
tests/les_miserables.txt:16641:freely. In order to do that it was necessary that the sun should come
tests/les_miserables.txt:16642:out and dry the soil. But the sun did not make its appearance. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16643:no longer the rendezvous of Austerlitz. When the first cannon was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16644:fired, the English general, Colville, looked at his watch, and noted
tests/les_miserables.txt:16647:The action was begun furiously, with more fury, perhaps, than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16648:Emperor would have wished, by the left wing of the French resting on
tests/les_miserables.txt:16649:Hougomont. At the same time Napoleon attacked the centre by hurling
tests/les_miserables.txt:16651:wing of the French against the left wing of the English, which rested
tests/les_miserables.txt:16654:The attack on Hougomont was something of a feint; the plan was to draw
tests/les_miserables.txt:16656:have succeeded if the four companies of the English guards and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16657:brave Belgians of Perponcher’s division had not held the position
tests/les_miserables.txt:16658:solidly, and Wellington, instead of massing his troops there, could
tests/les_miserables.txt:16659:confine himself to despatching thither, as reinforcements, only four
tests/les_miserables.txt:16660:more companies of guards and one battalion from Brunswick.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16662:The attack of the right wing of the French on Papelotte was calculated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16663:in fact, to overthrow the English left, to cut off the road to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16664:Brussels, to bar the passage against possible Prussians, to force
tests/les_miserables.txt:16665:Mont-Saint-Jean, to turn Wellington back on Hougomont, thence on
tests/les_miserables.txt:16666:Braine-l’Alleud, thence on Hal; nothing easier. With the exception of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16667:few incidents this attack succeeded. Papelotte was taken; La
tests/les_miserables.txt:16668:Haie-Sainte was carried.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16670:A detail to be noted. There was in the English infantry, particularly
tests/les_miserables.txt:16671:in Kempt’s brigade, a great many raw recruits. These young soldiers
tests/les_miserables.txt:16672:were valiant in the presence of our redoubtable infantry; their
tests/les_miserables.txt:16673:inexperience extricated them intrepidly from the dilemma; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:16674:performed particularly excellent service as skirmishers: the soldier
tests/les_miserables.txt:16675:skirmisher, left somewhat to himself, becomes, so to speak, his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:16676:general. These recruits displayed some of the French ingenuity and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16677:fury. This novice of an infantry had dash. This displeased Wellington.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16681:There is in this day an obscure interval, from midday to four o’clock;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16682:the middle portion of this battle is almost indistinct, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16683:participates in the sombreness of the hand-to-hand conflict. Twilight
tests/les_miserables.txt:16684:reigns over it. We perceive vast fluctuations in that fog, a dizzy
tests/les_miserables.txt:16685:mirage, paraphernalia of war almost unknown to-day, pendant colbacks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16686:floating sabre-taches, cross-belts, cartridge-boxes for grenades,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16688:garlanded with torsades, the almost black infantry of Brunswick mingled
tests/les_miserables.txt:16689:with the scarlet infantry of England, the English soldiers with great,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16690:white circular pads on the slopes of their shoulders for epaulets, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16691:Hanoverian light-horse with their oblong casques of leather, with brass
tests/les_miserables.txt:16692:hands and red horse-tails, the Scotch with their bare knees and plaids,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16693:the great white gaiters of our grenadiers; pictures, not strategic
tests/les_miserables.txt:16697:A certain amount of tempest is always mingled with a battle. _Quid
tests/les_miserables.txt:16698:obscurum, quid divinum_. Each historian traces, to some extent, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16699:particular feature which pleases him amid this pell-mell. Whatever may
tests/les_miserables.txt:16700:be the combinations of the generals, the shock of armed masses has an
tests/les_miserables.txt:16701:incalculable ebb. During the action the plans of the two leaders enter
tests/les_miserables.txt:16702:into each other and become mutually thrown out of shape. Such a point
tests/les_miserables.txt:16703:of the field of battle devours more combatants than such another, just
tests/les_miserables.txt:16704:as more or less spongy soils soak up more or less quickly the water
tests/les_miserables.txt:16705:which is poured on them. It becomes necessary to pour out more soldiers
tests/les_miserables.txt:16706:than one would like; a series of expenditures which are the unforeseen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16708:blood gush illogically, the fronts of the armies waver, the regiments
tests/les_miserables.txt:16709:form capes and gulfs as they enter and withdraw; all these reefs are
tests/les_miserables.txt:16710:continually moving in front of each other. Where the infantry stood the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16711:artillery arrives, the cavalry rushes in where the artillery was, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16713:disappeared; the open spots change place, the sombre folds advance and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16714:retreat, a sort of wind from the sepulchre pushes forward, hurls back,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16715:distends, and disperses these tragic multitudes. What is a fray? an
tests/les_miserables.txt:16716:oscillation? The immobility of a mathematical plan expresses a minute,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16717:not a day. In order to depict a battle, there is required one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:16718:powerful painters who have chaos in their brushes. Rembrandt is better
tests/les_miserables.txt:16719:than Vandermeulen; Vandermeulen, exact at noon, lies at three o’clock.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16720:Geometry is deceptive; the hurricane alone is trustworthy. That is what
tests/les_miserables.txt:16721:confers on Folard the right to contradict Polybius. Let us add, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:16722:there is a certain instant when the battle degenerates into a combat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16723:becomes specialized, and disperses into innumerable detailed feats,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16724:which, to borrow the expression of Napoleon himself, “belong rather to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16726:historian has, in this case, the evident right to sum up the whole. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:16727:cannot do more than seize the principal outlines of the struggle, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16728:it is not given to any one narrator, however conscientious he may be,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16729:to fix, absolutely, the form of that horrible cloud which is called a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16732:This, which is true of all great armed encounters, is particularly
tests/les_miserables.txt:16733:applicable to Waterloo.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16735:Nevertheless, at a certain moment in the afternoon the battle came to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16744:Towards four o’clock the condition of the English army was serious. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:16745:Prince of Orange was in command of the centre, Hill of the right wing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16746:Picton of the left wing. The Prince of Orange, desperate and intrepid,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16747:shouted to the Hollando-Belgians: “Nassau! Brunswick! Never retreat!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:16748:Hill, having been weakened, had come up to the support of Wellington;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16749:Picton was dead. At the very moment when the English had captured from
tests/les_miserables.txt:16750:the French the flag of the 105th of the line, the French had killed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16751:English general, Picton, with a bullet through the head. The battle
tests/les_miserables.txt:16752:had, for Wellington, two bases of action, Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16754:the German battalion which defended it, only forty-two men survived;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16755:all the officers, except five, were either dead or captured. Three
tests/les_miserables.txt:16756:thousand combatants had been massacred in that barn. A sergeant of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16758:his companions, had been killed there by a little French drummer-boy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16761:Lunenburg, carried by a prince of the house of Deux-Ponts. The Scotch
tests/les_miserables.txt:16762:Grays no longer existed; Ponsonby’s great dragoons had been hacked to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16763:pieces. That valiant cavalry had bent beneath the lancers of Bro and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16764:beneath the cuirassiers of Travers; out of twelve hundred horses, six
tests/les_miserables.txt:16765:hundred remained; out of three lieutenant-colonels, two lay on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16767:seven lance-thrusts. Gordon was dead. Marsh was dead. Two divisions,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16771:rallying-point, the centre. That point still held firm. Wellington
tests/les_miserables.txt:16772:reinforced it. He summoned thither Hill, who was at Merle-Braine; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:16775:The centre of the English army, rather concave, very dense, and very
tests/les_miserables.txt:16776:compact, was strongly posted. It occupied the plateau of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16778:slope, which was tolerably steep then. It rested on that stout stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:16779:dwelling which at that time belonged to the domain of Nivelles, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16780:which marks the intersection of the roads—a pile of the sixteenth
tests/les_miserables.txt:16781:century, and so robust that the cannon-balls rebounded from it without
tests/les_miserables.txt:16782:injuring it. All about the plateau the English had cut the hedges here
tests/les_miserables.txt:16784:a cannon between two branches, embattled the shrubs. There artillery
tests/les_miserables.txt:16785:was ambushed in the brushwood. This punic labor, incontestably
tests/les_miserables.txt:16786:authorized by war, which permits traps, was so well done, that Haxo,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16787:who had been despatched by the Emperor at nine o’clock in the morning
tests/les_miserables.txt:16788:to reconnoitre the enemy’s batteries, had discovered nothing of it, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:16789:had returned and reported to Napoleon that there were no obstacles
tests/les_miserables.txt:16790:except the two barricades which barred the road to Nivelles and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16793:carabines, was concealed in the tall wheat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16795:Thus assured and buttressed, the centre of the Anglo-Dutch army was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16797:then adjoining the field of battle, and intersected by the ponds of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16798:Groenendael and Boitsfort. An army could not retreat thither without
tests/les_miserables.txt:16801:according to many a man versed in the art,—though it is disputed by
tests/les_miserables.txt:16804:To this centre, Wellington added one of Chassé’s brigades taken from
tests/les_miserables.txt:16805:the right wing, and one of Wincke’s brigades taken from the left wing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16807:to the brigades of Mitchell, to the guards of Maitland, he gave as
tests/les_miserables.txt:16808:reinforcements and aids, the infantry of Brunswick, Nassau’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:16809:contingent, Kielmansegg’s Hanoverians, and Ompteda’s Germans. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:16810:placed twenty-six battalions under his hand. _The right wing_, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:16811:Charras says, _was thrown back on the centre_. An enormous battery was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16812:masked by sacks of earth at the spot where there now stands what is
tests/les_miserables.txt:16813:called the “Museum of Waterloo.” Besides this, Wellington had, behind a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16815:strong. It was the remaining half of the justly celebrated English
tests/les_miserables.txt:16816:cavalry. Ponsonby destroyed, Somerset remained.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16818:The battery, which, if completed, would have been almost a redoubt, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16819:ranged behind a very low garden wall, backed up with a coating of bags
tests/les_miserables.txt:16823:Wellington, uneasy but impassive, was on horseback, and there remained
tests/les_miserables.txt:16824:the whole day in the same attitude, a little in advance of the old mill
tests/les_miserables.txt:16825:of Mont-Saint-Jean, which is still in existence, beneath an elm, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:16826:an Englishman, an enthusiastic vandal, purchased later on for two
tests/les_miserables.txt:16827:hundred francs, cut down, and carried off. Wellington was coldly
tests/les_miserables.txt:16828:heroic. The bullets rained about him. His aide-de-camp, Gordon, fell at
tests/les_miserables.txt:16829:his side. Lord Hill, pointing to a shell which had burst, said to him:
tests/les_miserables.txt:16830:“My lord, what are your orders in case you are killed?” “To do like
tests/les_miserables.txt:16831:me,” replied Wellington. To Clinton he said laconically, “To hold this
tests/les_miserables.txt:16833:Wellington shouted to his old companions of Talavera, of Vittoria, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16834:Salamanca: “Boys, can retreat be thought of? Think of old England!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:16837:Towards four o’clock, the English line drew back. Suddenly nothing was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16838:visible on the crest of the plateau except the artillery and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16840:the shells and the French bullets, retreated into the bottom, now
tests/les_miserables.txt:16841:intersected by the back road of the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16842:retrograde movement took place, the English front hid itself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16843:Wellington drew back. “The beginning of retreat!” cried Napoleon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16851:The Emperor, though ill and discommoded on horseback by a local
tests/les_miserables.txt:16853:impenetrability had been smiling ever since the morning. On the 18th of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16856:favorites of destiny make mistakes. Our joys are composed of shadow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16860:Legion. Pompey was not destined to weep on that occasion, but it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:16861:certain that Cæsar laughed. While exploring on horseback at one o’clock
tests/les_miserables.txt:16862:on the preceding night, in storm and rain, in company with Bertrand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16863:the communes in the neighborhood of Rossomme, satisfied at the sight of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16864:the long line of the English camp-fires illuminating the whole horizon
tests/les_miserables.txt:16865:from Frischemont to Braine-l’Alleud, it had seemed to him that fate, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16866:whom he had assigned a day on the field of Waterloo, was exact to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16869:this fatalist was heard to cast into the darkness this mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:16870:saying, “We are in accord.” Napoleon was mistaken. They were no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:16871:in accord.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16874:by a joy for him. He traversed the line of the principal outposts,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16876:the wood of Hougomont, he heard the tread of a column on the march; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:16879:purpose of decamping. I will take prisoners the six thousand English
tests/les_miserables.txt:16880:who have just arrived at Ostend.” He conversed expansively; he regained
tests/les_miserables.txt:16881:the animation which he had shown at his landing on the first of March,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16882:when he pointed out to the Grand-Marshal the enthusiastic peasant of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16883:the Gulf Juan, and cried, “Well, Bertrand, here is a reinforcement
tests/les_miserables.txt:16886:rain redoubled in violence; the thunder rolled while the Emperor was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16889:At half-past three o’clock in the morning, he lost one illusion;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16890:officers who had been despatched to reconnoitre announced to him that
tests/les_miserables.txt:16892:bivouac-fire had been extinguished; the English army was asleep. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:16893:silence on earth was profound; the only noise was in the heavens. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:16894:four o’clock, a peasant was brought in to him by the scouts; this
tests/les_miserables.txt:16895:peasant had served as guide to a brigade of English cavalry, probably
tests/les_miserables.txt:16896:Vivian’s brigade, which was on its way to take up a position in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16897:village of Ohain, at the extreme left. At five o’clock, two Belgian
tests/les_miserables.txt:16899:and that the English army was ready for battle. “So much the better!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:16900:exclaimed Napoleon. “I prefer to overthrow them rather than to drive
tests/les_miserables.txt:16901:them back.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:16904:In the morning he dismounted in the mud on the slope which forms an
tests/les_miserables.txt:16905:angle with the Plancenoit road, had a kitchen table and a peasant’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:16906:chair brought to him from the farm of Rossomme, seated himself, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16907:truss of straw for a carpet, and spread out on the table the chart of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16909:checker-board.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:16912:In consequence of the rains during the night, the transports of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16915:did not prevent Napoleon from exclaiming cheerfully to Ney, “We have
tests/les_miserables.txt:16916:ninety chances out of a hundred.” At eight o’clock the Emperor’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:16919:before, in Brussels, at the Duchess of Richmond’s; and Soult, a rough
tests/les_miserables.txt:16920:man of war, with a face of an archbishop, said, “The ball takes place
tests/les_miserables.txt:16924:the foundation of his character,” says Gourgaud. “He abounded in
tests/les_miserables.txt:16925:pleasantries, which were more peculiar than witty,” says Benjamin
tests/les_miserables.txt:16926:Constant. These gayeties of a giant are worthy of insistence. It was he
tests/les_miserables.txt:16927:who called his grenadiers “his grumblers”; he pinched their ears; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:16928:pulled their moustaches. “The Emperor did nothing but play pranks on
tests/les_miserables.txt:16930:island of Elba to France, on the 27th of February, on the open sea, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16931:French brig of war, _Le Zéphyr_, having encountered the brig
tests/les_miserables.txt:16932:_L’Inconstant_, on which Napoleon was concealed, and having asked the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16933:news of Napoleon from _L’Inconstant_, the Emperor, who still wore in
tests/les_miserables.txt:16934:his hat the white and amaranthine cockade sown with bees, which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:16941:the Emperor dictated to them the order of battle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16943:At nine o’clock, at the instant when the French army, ranged in
tests/les_miserables.txt:16944:echelons and set in motion in five columns, had deployed—the divisions
tests/les_miserables.txt:16945:in two lines, the artillery between the brigades, the music at their
tests/les_miserables.txt:16946:head; as they beat the march, with rolls on the drums and the blasts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16947:trumpets, mighty, vast, joyous, a sea of casques, of sabres, and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16948:bayonets on the horizon, the Emperor was touched, and twice exclaimed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16949:“Magnificent! Magnificent!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:16952:Between nine o’clock and half-past ten the whole army, incredible as it
tests/les_miserables.txt:16956:that profound silence, like that which heralds the beginning of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16957:storm, which precedes engagements, the Emperor tapped Haxo on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16958:shoulder, as he beheld the three batteries of twelve-pounders, detached
tests/les_miserables.txt:16959:by his orders from the corps of Erlon, Reille, and Lobau, and destined
tests/les_miserables.txt:16960:to begin the action by taking Mont-Saint-Jean, which was situated at
tests/les_miserables.txt:16961:the intersection of the Nivelles and the Genappe roads, and said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:16965:Sure of the issue, he encouraged with a smile, as they passed before
tests/les_miserables.txt:16966:him, the company of sappers of the first corps, which he had appointed
tests/les_miserables.txt:16967:to barricade Mont-Saint-Jean as soon as the village should be carried.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16969:pity; perceiving on his left, at a spot where there now stands a large
tests/les_miserables.txt:16970:tomb, those admirable Scotch Grays, with their superb horses, massing
tests/les_miserables.txt:16974:Then he mounted his horse, advanced beyond Rossomme, and selected for
tests/les_miserables.txt:16975:his post of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16976:the road from Genappe to Brussels, which was his second station during
tests/les_miserables.txt:16977:the battle. The third station, the one adopted at seven o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16978:evening, between La Belle-Alliance and La Haie-Sainte, is formidable;
tests/les_miserables.txt:16979:it is a rather elevated knoll, which still exists, and behind which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16983:heavy artillery. Mouldy cannon-balls, old sword-blades, and shapeless
tests/les_miserables.txt:16984:projectiles, eaten up with rust, were picked up at the spot where his
tests/les_miserables.txt:16985:horse’s feet stood. _Scabra rubigine_. A few years ago, a shell of
tests/les_miserables.txt:16986:sixty pounds, still charged, and with its fuse broken off level with
tests/les_miserables.txt:16988:to his guide, Lacoste, a hostile and terrified peasant, who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:16989:attached to the saddle of a hussar, and who turned round at every
tests/les_miserables.txt:16990:discharge of canister and tried to hide behind Napoleon: “Fool, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:16991:shameful! You’ll get yourself killed with a ball in the back.” He who
tests/les_miserables.txt:16993:knoll, on turning over the sand, the remains of the neck of a bomb,
tests/les_miserables.txt:16995:fragments of iron which parted like elder-twigs between the fingers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:16997:Every one is aware that the variously inclined undulations of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:16999:place, are no longer what they were on June 18, 1815. By taking from
tests/les_miserables.txt:17001:relief has been taken away, and history, disconcerted, no longer finds
tests/les_miserables.txt:17003:it. Wellington, when he beheld Waterloo once more, two years later,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17004:exclaimed, “They have altered my field of battle!” Where the great
tests/les_miserables.txt:17006:hillock which descended in an easy slope towards the Nivelles road, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:17007:which was almost an escarpment on the side of the highway to Genappe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17008:The elevation of this escarpment can still be measured by the height of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17009:the two knolls of the two great sepulchres which enclose the road from
tests/les_miserables.txt:17011:the German tomb, is on the right. There is no French tomb. The whole of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17012:that plain is a sepulchre for France. Thanks to the thousands upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:17013:thousands of cartloads of earth employed in the hillock one hundred and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17014:fifty feet in height and half a mile in circumference, the plateau of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17015:Mont-Saint-Jean is now accessible by an easy slope. On the day of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17016:battle, particularly on the side of La Haie-Sainte, it was abrupt and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17017:difficult of approach. The slope there is so steep that the English
tests/les_miserables.txt:17018:cannon could not see the farm, situated in the bottom of the valley,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17019:which was the centre of the combat. On the 18th of June, 1815, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17020:rains had still farther increased this acclivity, the mud complicated
tests/les_miserables.txt:17021:the problem of the ascent, and the men not only slipped back, but stuck
tests/les_miserables.txt:17022:fast in the mire. Along the crest of the plateau ran a sort of trench
tests/les_miserables.txt:17023:whose presence it was impossible for the distant observer to divine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17025:What was this trench? Let us explain. Braine-l’Alleud is a Belgian
tests/les_miserables.txt:17026:village; Ohain is another. These villages, both of them concealed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17027:curves of the landscape, are connected by a road about a league and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17028:half in length, which traverses the plain along its undulating level,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17029:and often enters and buries itself in the hills like a furrow, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:17030:makes a ravine of this road in some places. In 1815, as at the present
tests/les_miserables.txt:17031:day, this road cut the crest of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean between
tests/les_miserables.txt:17034:appropriated for the monumental hillock. This road was, and still is, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17035:trench throughout the greater portion of its course; a hollow trench,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17037:crumbled away here and there, particularly in winter, under driving
tests/les_miserables.txt:17038:rains. Accidents happened here. The road was so narrow at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17039:Braine-l’Alleud entrance that a passer-by was crushed by a cart, as is
tests/les_miserables.txt:17040:proved by a stone cross which stands near the cemetery, and which gives
tests/les_miserables.txt:17041:the name of the dead, _Monsieur Bernard Debrye, Merchant of Brussels_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17042:and the date of the accident, _February, 1637_.8 It was so deep on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17043:table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean that a peasant, Mathieu Nicaise, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17044:crushed there, in 1783, by a slide from the slope, as is stated on
tests/les_miserables.txt:17045:another stone cross, the top of which has disappeared in the process of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17046:clearing the ground, but whose overturned pedestal is still visible on
tests/les_miserables.txt:17050:On the day of battle, this hollow road whose existence was in no way
tests/les_miserables.txt:17051:indicated, bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean, a trench at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17052:summit of the escarpment, a rut concealed in the soil, was invisible;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17061:So, on the morning of Waterloo, Napoleon was content.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17063:He was right; the plan of battle conceived by him was, as we have seen,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17066:The battle once begun, its very various changes,—the resistance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17067:Hougomont; the tenacity of La Haie-Sainte; the killing of Bauduin; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17068:disabling of Foy; the unexpected wall against which Soye’s brigade was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17070:nor powder sacks; the miring of the batteries; the fifteen unescorted
tests/les_miserables.txt:17071:pieces overwhelmed in a hollow way by Uxbridge; the small effect of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17073:the rain-soaked soil, and only succeeding in producing volcanoes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17074:mud, so that the canister was turned into a splash; the uselessness of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17075:Piré’s demonstration on Braine-l’Alleud; all that cavalry, fifteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:17077:alarmed, the left wing badly cut into; Ney’s strange mistake in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17078:massing, instead of echelonning the four divisions of the first corps;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17081:masses by the cannon-balls; attacking columns disorganized; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17083:Durutte compromised; Quiot repulsed; Lieutenant Vieux, that Hercules
tests/les_miserables.txt:17084:graduated at the Polytechnic School, wounded at the moment when he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17086:fire of the English barricade which barred the angle of the road from
tests/les_miserables.txt:17087:Genappe to Brussels; Marcognet’s division caught between the infantry
tests/les_miserables.txt:17088:and the cavalry, shot down at the very muzzle of the guns amid the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17089:grain by Best and Pack, put to the sword by Ponsonby; his battery of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17090:seven pieces spiked; the Prince of Saxe-Weimar holding and guarding, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17091:spite of the Comte d’Erlon, both Frischemont and Smohain; the flag of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17092:the 105th taken, the flag of the 45th captured; that black Prussian
tests/les_miserables.txt:17093:hussar stopped by runners of the flying column of three hundred light
tests/les_miserables.txt:17094:cavalry on the scout between Wavre and Plancenoit; the alarming things
tests/les_miserables.txt:17095:that had been said by prisoners; Grouchy’s delay; fifteen hundred men
tests/les_miserables.txt:17096:killed in the orchard of Hougomont in less than an hour; eighteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:17098:Haie-Sainte,—all these stormy incidents passing like the clouds of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17100:overshadowed that face of imperial certainty. Napoleon was accustomed
tests/les_miserables.txt:17102:cipher by cipher; ciphers mattered little to him, provided that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:17103:furnished the total—victory; he was not alarmed if the beginnings did
tests/les_miserables.txt:17104:go astray, since he thought himself the master and the possessor at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17110:protected in good and tolerated in evil. He had, or thought that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:17111:had, a connivance, one might almost say a complicity, of events in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:17112:favor, which was equivalent to the invulnerability of antiquity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17116:becomes perceptible in the depths of the heavens.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17119:suddenly beheld the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean cleared, and the van
tests/les_miserables.txt:17121:Emperor half rose in his stirrups. The lightning of victory flashed
tests/les_miserables.txt:17124:Wellington, driven into a corner at the forest of Soignes and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17125:destroyed—that was the definitive conquest of England by France; it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17126:Crécy, Poitiers, Malplaquet, and Ramillies avenged. The man of Marengo
tests/les_miserables.txt:17127:was wiping out Agincourt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17131:guard, standing behind him with grounded arms, watched him from below
tests/les_miserables.txt:17133:declivities, scrutinized the clumps of trees, the square of rye, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17134:path; he seemed to be counting each bush. He gazed with some intentness
tests/les_miserables.txt:17135:at the English barricades of the two highways,—two large abatis of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17137:cannon, the only ones out of all the English artillery which commanded
tests/les_miserables.txt:17139:where gleamed the Dutch bayonets of Chassé’s brigade. Near this
tests/les_miserables.txt:17140:barricade he observed the old chapel of Saint Nicholas, painted white,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17141:which stands at the angle of the crossroad near Braine-l’Alleud; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:17142:bent down and spoke in a low voice to the guide Lacoste. The guide made
tests/les_miserables.txt:17143:a negative sign with his head, which was probably perfidious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17147:Wellington had drawn back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17149:All that remained to do was to complete this retreat by crushing him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17151:Napoleon turning round abruptly, despatched an express at full speed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:17152:Paris to announce that the battle was won.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17156:He had just found his clap of thunder.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17158:He gave orders to Milhaud’s cuirassiers to carry the table-land of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17168:quarter of a league in extent. They were giant men, on colossal horses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17171:six picked gendarmes, the light cavalry of the Guard, eleven hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:17172:and ninety-seven men, and the lancers of the guard of eight hundred and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17173:eighty lances. They wore casques without horse-tails, and cuirasses of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17176:nine o’clock, with braying of trumpets and all the music playing “Let
tests/les_miserables.txt:17177:us watch o’er the Safety of the Empire,” they had come in a solid
tests/les_miserables.txt:17178:column, with one of their batteries on their flank, another in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:17179:centre, and deployed in two ranks between the roads to Genappe and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17180:Frischemont, and taken up their position for battle in that powerful
tests/les_miserables.txt:17181:second line, so cleverly arranged by Napoleon, which, having on its
tests/les_miserables.txt:17182:extreme left Kellermann’s cuirassiers and on its extreme right
tests/les_miserables.txt:17183:Milhaud’s cuirassiers, had, so to speak, two wings of iron.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17185:Aide-de-camp Bernard carried them the Emperor’s orders. Ney drew his
tests/les_miserables.txt:17186:sword and placed himself at their head. The enormous squadrons were set
tests/les_miserables.txt:17189:Then a formidable spectacle was seen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17191:All their cavalry, with upraised swords, standards and trumpets flung
tests/les_miserables.txt:17192:to the breeze, formed in columns by divisions, descended, by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17193:simultaneous movement and like one man, with the precision of a brazen
tests/les_miserables.txt:17194:battering-ram which is effecting a breach, the hill of La Belle
tests/les_miserables.txt:17195:Alliance, plunged into the terrible depths in which so many men had
tests/les_miserables.txt:17197:shadow, reappeared on the other side of the valley, still compact and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17198:in close ranks, mounting at a full trot, through a storm of grape-shot
tests/les_miserables.txt:17199:which burst upon them, the terrible muddy slope of the table-land of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17200:Mont-Saint-Jean. They ascended, grave, threatening, imperturbable; in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17201:the intervals between the musketry and the artillery, their colossal
tests/les_miserables.txt:17202:trampling was audible. Being two divisions, there were two columns of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17205:crawling towards the crest of the table-land. It traversed the battle
tests/les_miserables.txt:17208:Nothing like it had been seen since the taking of the great redoubt of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17209:the Muskowa by the heavy cavalry; Murat was lacking here, but Ney was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17210:again present. It seemed as though that mass had become a monster and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17211:had but one soul. Each column undulated and swelled like the ring of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17212:polyp. They could be seen through a vast cloud of smoke which was rent
tests/les_miserables.txt:17213:here and there. A confusion of helmets, of cries, of sabres, a stormy
tests/les_miserables.txt:17214:heaving of the cruppers of horses amid the cannons and the flourish of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17215:trumpets, a terrible and disciplined tumult; over all, the cuirasses
tests/les_miserables.txt:17216:like the scales on the hydra.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17219:this vision appeared, no doubt, in the ancient Orphic epics, which told
tests/les_miserables.txt:17220:of the centaurs, the old hippanthropes, those Titans with human heads
tests/les_miserables.txt:17221:and equestrian chests who scaled Olympus at a gallop, horrible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17224:Odd numerical coincidence,—twenty-six battalions rode to meet
tests/les_miserables.txt:17225:twenty-six battalions. Behind the crest of the plateau, in the shadow
tests/les_miserables.txt:17228:first line, six in the second, the stocks of their guns to their
tests/les_miserables.txt:17229:shoulders, taking aim at that which was on the point of appearing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17230:waited, calm, mute, motionless. They did not see the cuirassiers, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17231:the cuirassiers did not see them. They listened to the rise of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:17233:the alternate and symmetrical tramp of their hoofs at full trot, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17234:jingling of the cuirasses, the clang of the sabres and a sort of grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:17235:and savage breathing. There ensued a most terrible silence; then, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:17236:at once, a long file of uplifted arms, brandishing sabres, appeared
tests/les_miserables.txt:17237:above the crest, and casques, trumpets, and standards, and three
tests/les_miserables.txt:17238:thousand heads with gray moustaches, shouting, “Vive l’Empereur!” All
tests/les_miserables.txt:17239:this cavalry debouched on the plateau, and it was like the appearance
tests/les_miserables.txt:17242:All at once, a tragic incident; on the English left, on our right, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17243:head of the column of cuirassiers reared up with a frightful clamor. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:17244:arriving at the culminating point of the crest, ungovernable, utterly
tests/les_miserables.txt:17245:given over to fury and their course of extermination of the squares and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17246:cannon, the cuirassiers had just caught sight of a trench,—a trench
tests/les_miserables.txt:17249:It was a terrible moment. The ravine was there, unexpected, yawning,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17250:directly under the horses’ feet, two fathoms deep between its double
tests/les_miserables.txt:17251:slopes; the second file pushed the first into it, and the third pushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:17252:on the second; the horses reared and fell backward, landed on their
tests/les_miserables.txt:17253:haunches, slid down, all four feet in the air, crushing and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17255:column being no longer anything more than a projectile,—the force which
tests/les_miserables.txt:17256:had been acquired to crush the English crushed the French; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17257:inexorable ravine could only yield when filled; horses and riders
tests/les_miserables.txt:17258:rolled there pell-mell, grinding each other, forming but one mass of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17259:flesh in this gulf: when this trench was full of living men, the rest
tests/les_miserables.txt:17260:marched over them and passed on. Almost a third of Dubois’s brigade
tests/les_miserables.txt:17265:A local tradition, which evidently exaggerates matters, says that two
tests/les_miserables.txt:17267:of Ohain. This figure probably comprises all the other corpses which
tests/les_miserables.txt:17268:were flung into this ravine the day after the combat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17270:Let us note in passing that it was Dubois’s sorely tried brigade which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17271:an hour previously, making a charge to one side, had captured the flag
tests/les_miserables.txt:17274:Napoleon, before giving the order for this charge of Milhaud’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:17275:cuirassiers, had scrutinized the ground, but had not been able to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:17276:that hollow road, which did not even form a wrinkle on the surface of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17278:white chapel which marks its angle of junction with the Nivelles
tests/les_miserables.txt:17280:obstacle, to the guide Lacoste. The guide had answered No. We might
tests/les_miserables.txt:17281:almost affirm that Napoleon’s catastrophe originated in that sign of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17287:No. Why? Because of Wellington? Because of Blücher? No. Because of God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17289:Bonaparte victor at Waterloo; that does not come within the law of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17290:nineteenth century. Another series of facts was in preparation, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17291:which there was no longer any room for Napoleon. The ill will of events
tests/les_miserables.txt:17292:had declared itself long before.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17296:The excessive weight of this man in human destiny disturbed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17297:balance. This individual alone counted for more than a universal group.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17298:These plethoras of all human vitality concentrated in a single head;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17300:civilization were it to last. The moment had arrived for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17301:incorruptible and supreme equity to alter its plan. Probably the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17302:principles and the elements, on which the regular gravitations of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17303:moral, as of the material, world depend, had complained. Smoking blood,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17304:over-filled cemeteries, mothers in tears,—these are formidable
tests/les_miserables.txt:17306:are mysterious groanings of the shades, to which the abyss lends an
tests/les_miserables.txt:17309:Napoleon had been denounced in the infinite and his fall had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:17310:decided on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17314:Waterloo is not a battle; it is a change of front on the part of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17325:Sixty cannons and the thirteen squares darted lightning point-blank on
tests/les_miserables.txt:17326:the cuirassiers. The intrepid General Delort made the military salute
tests/les_miserables.txt:17330:squares at a gallop. The cuirassiers had not had even the time for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17331:halt. The disaster of the hollow road had decimated, but not
tests/les_miserables.txt:17332:discouraged them. They belonged to that class of men who, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:17333:diminished in number, increase in courage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17335:Wathier’s column alone had suffered in the disaster; Delort’s column,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17336:which Ney had deflected to the left, as though he had a presentiment of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17339:The cuirassiers hurled themselves on the English squares.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17342:fist,—such was the attack.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17344:There are moments in battles in which the soul hardens the man until
tests/les_miserables.txt:17345:the soldier is changed into a statue, and when all this flesh turns
tests/les_miserables.txt:17351:All the faces of the English squares were attacked at once. A frenzied
tests/les_miserables.txt:17352:whirl enveloped them. That cold infantry remained impassive. The first
tests/les_miserables.txt:17353:rank knelt and received the cuirassiers on their bayonets, the second
tests/les_miserables.txt:17354:ranks shot them down; behind the second rank the cannoneers charged
tests/les_miserables.txt:17356:eruption of grape-shot, and closed again. The cuirassiers replied by
tests/les_miserables.txt:17357:crushing them. Their great horses reared, strode across the ranks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17358:leaped over the bayonets and fell, gigantic, in the midst of these four
tests/les_miserables.txt:17359:living wells. The cannon-balls ploughed furrows in these cuirassiers;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17360:the cuirassiers made breaches in the squares. Files of men disappeared,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17362:of these centaurs; hence a hideousness of wounds which has probably
tests/les_miserables.txt:17363:never been seen anywhere else. The squares, wasted by this mad cavalry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17364:closed up their ranks without flinching. Inexhaustible in the matter of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17365:grape-shot, they created explosions in their assailants’ midst. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:17366:form of this combat was monstrous. These squares were no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:17367:battalions, they were craters; those cuirassiers were no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:17368:cavalry, they were a tempest. Each square was a volcano attacked by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17369:cloud; lava contended with lightning.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17372:air, was almost annihilated at the very first shock. lt was formed of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17373:the 75th regiment of Highlanders. The bagpipe-player in the centre
tests/les_miserables.txt:17374:dropped his melancholy eyes, filled with the reflections of the forests
tests/les_miserables.txt:17376:exterminated around him, and seated on a drum, with his pibroch under
tests/les_miserables.txt:17377:his arm, played the Highland airs. These Scotchmen died thinking of Ben
tests/les_miserables.txt:17378:Lothian, as did the Greeks recalling Argos. The sword of a cuirassier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17379:which hewed down the bagpipes and the arm which bore it, put an end to
tests/les_miserables.txt:17382:The cuirassiers, relatively few in number, and still further diminished
tests/les_miserables.txt:17383:by the catastrophe of the ravine, had almost the whole English army
tests/les_miserables.txt:17384:against them, but they multiplied themselves so that each man of them
tests/les_miserables.txt:17386:Wellington perceived it, and thought of his cavalry. Had Napoleon at
tests/les_miserables.txt:17390:All at once, the cuirassiers, who had been the assailants, found
tests/les_miserables.txt:17391:themselves assailed. The English cavalry was at their back. Before them
tests/les_miserables.txt:17394:German light-horse, and on his left, Trip with the Belgian carabineers;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17395:the cuirassiers attacked on the flank and in front, before and in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17396:rear, by infantry and cavalry, had to face all sides. What mattered it
tests/les_miserables.txt:17398:indescribable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17400:In addition to this, they had behind them the battery, which was still
tests/les_miserables.txt:17401:thundering. It was necessary that it should be so, or they could never
tests/les_miserables.txt:17402:have been wounded in the back. One of their cuirasses, pierced on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17403:shoulder by a ball from a biscayan,9 is in the collection of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17406:For such Frenchmen nothing less than such Englishmen was needed. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17407:no longer a hand-to-hand conflict; it was a shadow, a fury, a dizzy
tests/les_miserables.txt:17408:transport of souls and courage, a hurricane of lightning swords. In an
tests/les_miserables.txt:17410:hundred. Fuller, their lieutenant-colonel, fell dead. Ney rushed up
tests/les_miserables.txt:17411:with the lancers and Lefebvre-Desnouettes’s light-horse. The plateau of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17412:Mont-Saint-Jean was captured, recaptured, captured again. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:17413:cuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the infantry; or, to put
tests/les_miserables.txt:17414:it more exactly, the whole of that formidable rout collared each other
tests/les_miserables.txt:17418:the cuirassiers remained on the plateau. This conflict lasted two
tests/les_miserables.txt:17422:they not been enfeebled in their first shock by the disaster of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17423:hollow road the cuirassiers would have overwhelmed the centre and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17424:decided the victory. This extraordinary cavalry petrified Clinton, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:17426:admired heroically. He said in an undertone, “Sublime!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:17429:The cuirassiers annihilated seven squares out of thirteen, took or
tests/les_miserables.txt:17430:spiked sixty pieces of ordnance, and captured from the English
tests/les_miserables.txt:17431:regiments six flags, which three cuirassiers and three chasseurs of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17432:Guard bore to the Emperor, in front of the farm of La Belle Alliance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17435:duel between two raging, wounded men, each of whom, still fighting and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17438:Which of the two will be the first to fall?
tests/les_miserables.txt:17440:The conflict on the plateau continued.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17442:What had become of the cuirassiers? No one could have told. One thing
tests/les_miserables.txt:17443:is certain, that on the day after the battle, a cuirassier and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:17444:horse were found dead among the woodwork of the scales for vehicles at
tests/les_miserables.txt:17446:Genappe, La Hulpe, and Brussels meet and intersect each other. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:17447:horseman had pierced the English lines. One of the men who picked up
tests/les_miserables.txt:17451:Wellington felt that he was yielding. The crisis was at hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17453:The cuirassiers had not succeeded, since the centre was not broken
tests/les_miserables.txt:17455:and in fact it remained, to a great extent, with the English.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17456:Wellington held the village and the culminating plain; Ney had only the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17457:crest and the slope. They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on both
tests/les_miserables.txt:17462:reinforcements. “There are none,” replied Wellington; “he must let
tests/les_miserables.txt:17463:himself be killed!” Almost at that same moment, a singular coincidence
tests/les_miserables.txt:17464:which paints the exhaustion of the two armies, Ney demanded infantry
tests/les_miserables.txt:17465:from Napoleon, and Napoleon exclaimed, “Infantry! Where does he expect
tests/les_miserables.txt:17466:me to get it? Does he think I can make it?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:17469:Nevertheless, the English army was in the worse case of the two. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:17470:furious onsets of those great squadrons with cuirasses of iron and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17472:clustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment; such and such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17473:battalion was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant; Alten’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:17477:those Dutch grenadiers, who, intermingled with Spaniards in our ranks
tests/les_miserables.txt:17479:English standard, fought against Napoleon. The loss in officers was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17480:considerable. Lord Uxbridge, who had his leg buried on the following
tests/les_miserables.txt:17481:day, had his knee shattered. If, on the French side, in that tussle of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17482:the cuirassiers, Delort, l’Héritier, Colbert, Dnop, Travers, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17483:Blancard were disabled, on the side of the English there was Alten
tests/les_miserables.txt:17484:wounded, Barne wounded, Delancey killed, Van Meeren killed, Ompteda
tests/les_miserables.txt:17485:killed, the whole of Wellington’s staff decimated, and England had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17486:worse of it in that bloody scale. The second regiment of foot-guards
tests/les_miserables.txt:17487:had lost five lieutenant-colonels, four captains, and three ensigns;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17488:the first battalion of the 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and 1,200
tests/les_miserables.txt:17489:soldiers; the 79th Highlanders had lost 24 officers wounded, 18
tests/les_miserables.txt:17490:officers killed, 450 soldiers killed. The Hanoverian hussars of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17491:Cumberland, a whole regiment, with Colonel Hacke at its head, who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17492:destined to be tried later on and cashiered, had turned bridle in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17493:presence of the fray, and had fled to the forest of Soignes, sowing
tests/les_miserables.txt:17495:baggage-wagons, the wagons filled with wounded, on perceiving that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17496:French were gaining ground and approaching the forest, rushed headlong
tests/les_miserables.txt:17497:thither. The Dutch, mowed down by the French cavalry, cried, “Alarm!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:17498:From Vert-Coucou to Groenendael, for a distance of nearly two leagues
tests/les_miserables.txt:17499:in the direction of Brussels, according to the testimony of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17500:eye-witnesses who are still alive, the roads were encumbered with
tests/les_miserables.txt:17501:fugitives. This panic was such that it attacked the Prince de Condé at
tests/les_miserables.txt:17502:Mechlin, and Louis XVIII. at Ghent. With the exception of the feeble
tests/les_miserables.txt:17503:reserve echelonned behind the ambulance established at the farm of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17504:Mont-Saint-Jean, and of Vivian’s and Vandeleur’s brigades, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:17505:flanked the left wing, Wellington had no cavalry left. A number of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17506:batteries lay unhorsed. These facts are attested by Siborne; and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17508:Anglo-Dutch army was reduced to thirty-four thousand men. The Iron Duke
tests/les_miserables.txt:17509:remained calm, but his lips blanched. Vincent, the Austrian
tests/les_miserables.txt:17510:commissioner, Alava, the Spanish commissioner, who were present at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17511:battle in the English staff, thought the Duke lost. At five o’clock
tests/les_miserables.txt:17512:Wellington drew out his watch, and he was heard to murmur these
tests/les_miserables.txt:17513:sinister words, “Blücher, or night!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:17517:the heights in the direction of Frischemont.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17519:Here comes the change of face in this giant drama.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17527:The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known. Grouchy hoped for,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17528:Blücher arriving. Death instead of life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17530:Fate has these turns; the throne of the world was expected; it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17533:If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bülow, Blücher’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:17534:lieutenant, had advised him to debouch from the forest above
tests/les_miserables.txt:17535:Frischemont, instead of below Plancenoit, the form of the nineteenth
tests/les_miserables.txt:17536:century might, perhaps, have been different. Napoleon would have won
tests/les_miserables.txt:17537:the battle of Waterloo. By any other route than that below Plancenoit,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17538:the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine impassable for
tests/les_miserables.txt:17541:Now the Prussian general, Muffling, declares that one hour’s delay, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17542:Blücher would not have found Wellington on his feet. “The battle was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17547:moreover, been very much delayed. He had bivouacked at Dion-le-Mont,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17549:divisions stuck fast in the mire. The ruts were up to the hubs of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17550:cannons. Moreover, he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on the narrow
tests/les_miserables.txt:17552:French, so the caissons and ammunition-wagons could not pass between
tests/les_miserables.txt:17554:conflagration was extinguished. It was midday before Bülow’s vanguard
tests/les_miserables.txt:17555:had been able to reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17557:Had the action been begun two hours earlier, it would have been over at
tests/les_miserables.txt:17558:four o’clock, and Blücher would have fallen on the battle won by
tests/les_miserables.txt:17559:Napoleon. Such are these immense risks proportioned to an infinite
tests/les_miserables.txt:17560:which we cannot comprehend.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17562:The Emperor had been the first, as early as midday, to descry with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:17563:field-glass, on the extreme horizon, something which had attracted his
tests/les_miserables.txt:17564:attention. He had said, “I see yonder a cloud, which seems to me to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:17565:troops.” Then he asked the Duc de Dalmatie, “Soult, what do you see in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17566:the direction of Chapelle-Saint-Lambert?” The marshal, levelling his
tests/les_miserables.txt:17567:glass, answered, “Four or five thousand men, Sire; evidently Grouchy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:17569:had studied “the cloud” pointed out by the Emperor. Some said: “It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:17570:trees.” The truth is, that the cloud did not move. The Emperor detached
tests/les_miserables.txt:17571:Domon’s division of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that quarter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17573:Bülow had not moved, in fact. His vanguard was very feeble, and could
tests/les_miserables.txt:17574:accomplish nothing. He was obliged to wait for the body of the army
tests/les_miserables.txt:17575:corps, and he had received orders to concentrate his forces before
tests/les_miserables.txt:17576:entering into line; but at five o’clock, perceiving Wellington’s peril,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17577:Blücher ordered Bülow to attack, and uttered these remarkable words:
tests/les_miserables.txt:17581:A little later, the divisions of Losthin, Hiller, Hacke, and Ryssel
tests/les_miserables.txt:17582:deployed before Lobau’s corps, the cavalry of Prince William of Prussia
tests/les_miserables.txt:17583:debouched from the forest of Paris, Plancenoit was in flames, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17584:Prussian cannon-balls began to rain even upon the ranks of the guard in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17594:broken to pieces; eighty-six mouths of fire thundering simultaneously;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17595:Pirch the first coming up with Bülow; Zieten’s cavalry led by Blücher
tests/les_miserables.txt:17596:in person, the French driven back; Marcognet swept from the plateau of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17598:Lobau caught on the flank; a fresh battle precipitating itself on our
tests/les_miserables.txt:17600:offensive and thrust forward; the gigantic breach made in the French
tests/les_miserables.txt:17601:army; the English grape-shot and the Prussian grape-shot aiding each
tests/les_miserables.txt:17603:Guard entering the line in the midst of this terrible crumbling of all
tests/les_miserables.txt:17606:Conscious that they were about to die, they shouted, “Vive l’Empereur!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:17607:History records nothing more touching than that agony bursting forth in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17608:acclamations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17610:The sky had been overcast all day long. All of a sudden, at that very
tests/les_miserables.txt:17611:moment,—it was eight o’clock in the evening—the clouds on the horizon
tests/les_miserables.txt:17616:Each battalion of the Guard was commanded by a general for this final
tests/les_miserables.txt:17617:catastrophe. Friant, Michel, Roguet, Harlet, Mallet, Poret de Morvan,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17618:were there. When the tall caps of the grenadiers of the Guard, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:17619:their large plaques bearing the eagle appeared, symmetrical, in line,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17620:tranquil, in the midst of that combat, the enemy felt a respect for
tests/les_miserables.txt:17621:France; they thought they beheld twenty victories entering the field of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17622:battle, with wings outspread, and those who were the conquerors,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17625:guards, lying flat behind the hedges, sprang up, a cloud of grape-shot
tests/les_miserables.txt:17626:riddled the tricolored flag and whistled round our eagles; all hurled
tests/les_miserables.txt:17627:themselves forwards, and the final carnage began. In the darkness, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17629:shock of the rout it heard the desperate flight which had taken the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17630:place of the “Vive l’Empereur!” and, with flight behind it, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:17631:continued to advance, more crushed, losing more men at every step that
tests/les_miserables.txt:17633:soldier in that troop was as much of a hero as the general. Not a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:17634:was missing in that suicide.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17636:Ney, bewildered, great with all the grandeur of accepted death, offered
tests/les_miserables.txt:17639:with uniform unbuttoned, one of his epaulets half cut off by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17641:by a bullet; bleeding, bemired, magnificent, a broken sword in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:17642:hand, he said, “Come and see how a Marshal of France dies on the field
tests/les_miserables.txt:17646:crushing a handful of men, he shouted: “So there is nothing for me! Oh!
tests/les_miserables.txt:17648:Unhappy man, thou wert reserved for French bullets!
tests/les_miserables.txt:17656:The rout behind the Guard was melancholy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17658:The army yielded suddenly on all sides at once,—Hougomont, La
tests/les_miserables.txt:17659:Haie-Sainte, Papelotte, Plancenoit. The cry “Treachery!” was followed
tests/les_miserables.txt:17660:by a cry of “Save yourselves who can!” An army which is disbanding is
tests/les_miserables.txt:17661:like a thaw. All yields, splits, cracks, floats, rolls, falls, jostles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17662:hastens, is precipitated. The disintegration is unprecedented. Ney
tests/les_miserables.txt:17663:borrows a horse, leaps upon it, and without hat, cravat, or sword,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17664:places himself across the Brussels road, stopping both English and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17665:French. He strives to detain the army, he recalls it to its duty, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:17666:insults it, he clings to the rout. He is overwhelmed. The soldiers fly
tests/les_miserables.txt:17668:go and come in affright as though tossed back and forth between the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17670:Pack, and Rylandt; the worst of hand-to-hand conflicts is the defeat;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17671:friends kill each other in order to escape; squadrons and battalions
tests/les_miserables.txt:17672:break and disperse against each other, like the tremendous foam of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17674:the tide. In vain does Napoleon erect walls from what is left to him of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17675:his Guard; in vain does he expend in a last effort his last serviceable
tests/les_miserables.txt:17677:Lobau before Bülow, Morand before Pirch, Domon and Subervic before
tests/les_miserables.txt:17678:Prince William of Prussia; Guyot, who led the Emperor’s squadrons to
tests/les_miserables.txt:17679:the charge, falls beneath the feet of the English dragoons. Napoleon
tests/les_miserables.txt:17681:entreats them. All the mouths which in the morning had shouted, “Long
tests/les_miserables.txt:17682:live the Emperor!” remain gaping; they hardly recognize him. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:17683:Prussian cavalry, newly arrived, dashes forwards, flies, hews, slashes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17684:kills, exterminates. Horses lash out, the cannons flee; the soldiers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17685:the artillery-train unharness the caissons and use the horses to make
tests/les_miserables.txt:17686:their escape; transports overturned, with all four wheels in the air,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17687:clog the road and occasion massacres. Men are crushed, trampled down,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17690:hills, the valleys, the woods, encumbered by this invasion of forty
tests/les_miserables.txt:17691:thousand men. Shouts despair, knapsacks and guns flung among the rye,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17692:passages forced at the point of the sword, no more comrades, no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:17693:officers, no more generals, an inexpressible terror. Zieten putting
tests/les_miserables.txt:17694:France to the sword at its leisure. Lions converted into goats. Such
tests/les_miserables.txt:17699:entrance to the village was barricaded, but at the first volley of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17700:Prussian canister, all took to flight again, and Lobau was taken. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:17701:volley of grape-shot can be seen to-day imprinted on the ancient gable
tests/les_miserables.txt:17702:of a brick building on the right of the road at a few minutes’ distance
tests/les_miserables.txt:17704:furious, no doubt, that they were not more entirely the conquerors. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:17705:pursuit was stupendous. Blücher ordered extermination. Roguet had set
tests/les_miserables.txt:17706:the lugubrious example of threatening with death any French grenadier
tests/les_miserables.txt:17707:who should bring him a Prussian prisoner. Blücher outdid Roguet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17710:the sword and slew the prisoner. The victory was completed by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17711:assassination of the vanquished. Let us inflict punishment, since we
tests/les_miserables.txt:17712:are history: old Blücher disgraced himself. This ferocity put the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17713:finishing touch to the disaster. The desperate route traversed Genappe,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17719:bravery which ever astounded history,—is that causeless? No. The shadow
tests/les_miserables.txt:17720:of an enormous right is projected athwart Waterloo. It is the day of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17721:destiny. The force which is mightier than man produced that day. Hence
tests/les_miserables.txt:17722:the terrified wrinkle of those brows; hence all those great souls
tests/les_miserables.txt:17723:surrendering their swords. Those who had conquered Europe have fallen
tests/les_miserables.txt:17725:present shadow of a terrible presence. _Hoc erat in fatis_. That day
tests/les_miserables.txt:17726:the perspective of the human race underwent a change. Waterloo is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17727:hinge of the nineteenth century. The disappearance of the great man was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17728:necessary to the advent of the great century. Some one, a person to
tests/les_miserables.txt:17729:whom one replies not, took the responsibility on himself. The panic of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17730:heroes can be explained. In the battle of Waterloo there is something
tests/les_miserables.txt:17731:more than a cloud, there is something of the meteor. God has passed by.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17734:the skirt of his coat and detained a man, haggard, pensive, sinister,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17735:gloomy, who, dragged to that point by the current of the rout, had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:17738:somnambulist of this dream which had crumbled, essaying once more to
tests/les_miserables.txt:17739:advance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17748:defeat, as rocks in running water, held their own until night. Night
tests/les_miserables.txt:17749:came, death also; they awaited that double shadow, and, invincible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17750:allowed themselves to be enveloped therein. Each regiment, isolated
tests/les_miserables.txt:17752:part, died alone. They had taken up position for this final action,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17758:At twilight, towards nine o’clock in the evening, one of them was left
tests/les_miserables.txt:17760:the foot of that declivity which the cuirassiers had ascended, now
tests/les_miserables.txt:17761:inundated by the masses of the English, under the converging fires of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17762:the victorious hostile cavalry, under a frightful density of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17763:projectiles, this square fought on. It was commanded by an obscure
tests/les_miserables.txt:17764:officer named Cambronne. At each discharge, the square diminished and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17765:replied. It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade, continually
tests/les_miserables.txt:17766:contracting its four walls. The fugitives pausing breathless for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17767:moment in the distance, listened in the darkness to that gloomy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17768:ever-decreasing thunder.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17770:When this legion had been reduced to a handful, when nothing was left
tests/les_miserables.txt:17772:longer anything but clubs, when the heap of corpses was larger than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17773:group of survivors, there reigned among the conquerors, around those
tests/les_miserables.txt:17774:men dying so sublimely, a sort of sacred terror, and the English
tests/les_miserables.txt:17775:artillery, taking breath, became silent. This furnished a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17776:respite. These combatants had around them something in the nature of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17777:swarm of spectres, silhouettes of men on horseback, the black profiles
tests/les_miserables.txt:17778:of cannon, the white sky viewed through wheels and gun-carriages, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17779:colossal death’s-head, which the heroes saw constantly through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17780:smoke, in the depths of the battle, advanced upon them and gazed at
tests/les_miserables.txt:17781:them. Through the shades of twilight they could hear the pieces being
tests/les_miserables.txt:17782:loaded; the matches all lighted, like the eyes of tigers at night,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17783:formed a circle round their heads; all the lintstocks of the English
tests/les_miserables.txt:17784:batteries approached the cannons, and then, with emotion, holding the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17786:according to some, Maitland according to others, shouted to them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17787:“Surrender, brave Frenchmen!” Cambronne replied, “——.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:17799:If any French reader object to having his susceptibilities offended,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17800:one would have to refrain from repeating in his presence what is
tests/les_miserables.txt:17801:perhaps the finest reply that a Frenchman ever made. This would enjoin
tests/les_miserables.txt:17802:us from consigning something sublime to History.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17804:At our own risk and peril, let us violate this injunction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17808:To make that reply and then perish, what could be grander? For being
tests/les_miserables.txt:17813:flight; nor Wellington, giving way at four o’clock, in despair at five;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17814:nor Blücher, who took no part in the engagement. The winner of Waterloo
tests/les_miserables.txt:17817:To thunder forth such a reply at the lightning-flash that kills you is
tests/les_miserables.txt:17818:to conquer!
tests/les_miserables.txt:17821:pedestal to the future lion, to hurl such a challenge to the midnight
tests/les_miserables.txt:17822:rainstorm, to the treacherous wall of Hougomont, to the sunken road of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17823:Ohain, to Grouchy’s delay, to Blücher’s arrival, to be Irony itself in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17824:the tomb, to act so as to stand upright though fallen, to drown in two
tests/les_miserables.txt:17825:syllables the European coalition, to offer kings privies which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17826:Cæsars once knew, to make the lowest of words the most lofty by
tests/les_miserables.txt:17827:entwining with it the glory of France, insolently to end Waterloo with
tests/les_miserables.txt:17828:Mardigras, to finish Leonidas with Rabellais, to set the crown on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:17829:victory by a word impossible to speak, to lose the field and preserve
tests/les_miserables.txt:17830:history, to have the laugh on your side after such a carnage,—this is
tests/les_miserables.txt:17833:It was an insult such as a thunder-cloud might hurl! It reaches the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17834:grandeur of Æschylus!
tests/les_miserables.txt:17836:Cambronne’s reply produces the effect of a violent break. ’Tis like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17837:breaking of a heart under a weight of scorn. ’Tis the overflow of agony
tests/les_miserables.txt:17838:bursting forth. Who conquered? Wellington? No! Had it not been for
tests/les_miserables.txt:17839:Blücher, he was lost. Was it Blücher? No! If Wellington had not begun,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17840:Blücher could not have finished. This Cambronne, this man spending his
tests/les_miserables.txt:17842:that here is a falsehood, a falsehood in a catastrophe, and so doubly
tests/les_miserables.txt:17843:agonizing; and at the moment when his rage is bursting forth because of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17844:it, he is offered this mockery,—life! How could he restrain himself?
tests/les_miserables.txt:17845:Yonder are all the kings of Europe, the general’s flushed with victory,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17847:victorious soldiers, and back of the hundred thousand a million; their
tests/les_miserables.txt:17848:cannon stand with yawning mouths, the match is lighted; they grind down
tests/les_miserables.txt:17850:just crushed Napoleon, and only Cambronne remains,—only this earthworm
tests/les_miserables.txt:17853:word. In face of this mean and mighty victory, in face of this victory
tests/les_miserables.txt:17854:which counts none victorious, this desperate soldier stands erect. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:17857:force, by brute matter, he finds in his soul an expression:
tests/les_miserables.txt:17858:_“Excrément!”_ We repeat it,—to use that word, to do thus, to invent
tests/les_miserables.txt:17859:such an expression, is to be the conqueror!
tests/les_miserables.txt:17861:The spirit of mighty days at that portentous moment made its descent on
tests/les_miserables.txt:17864:high. An emanation from the divine whirlwind leaps forth and comes
tests/les_miserables.txt:17866:supreme, and the other utters the frightful cry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17868:This challenge of titanic scorn Cambronne hurls not only at Europe in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17870:in the name of the Revolution. It is heard, and Cambronne is recognized
tests/les_miserables.txt:17871:as possessed by the ancient spirit of the Titans. Danton seems to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:17874:At that word from Cambronne, the English voice responded, “Fire!” The
tests/les_miserables.txt:17876:belched a last terrible gush of grape-shot; a vast volume of smoke,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17880:living redoubt lay prone, and hardly was there discernible, here and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17881:there, even a quiver in the bodies; it was thus that the French
tests/les_miserables.txt:17885:passes whistling, and cheerfully whipping up his horse at four o’clock
tests/les_miserables.txt:17894:The battle of Waterloo is an enigma. It is as obscure to those who won
tests/les_miserables.txt:17895:it as to those who lost it. For Napoleon it was a panic;10 Blücher sees
tests/les_miserables.txt:17897:Look at the reports. The bulletins are confused, the commentaries
tests/les_miserables.txt:17899:Waterloo into four moments; Muffling cuts it up into three changes;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17901:seized with his haughty glance the characteristic outlines of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:17902:catastrophe of human genius in conflict with divine chance. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17904:dazzled state they fumble about. It was a day of lightning brilliancy;
tests/les_miserables.txt:17905:in fact, a crumbling of the military monarchy which, to the vast
tests/les_miserables.txt:17906:stupefaction of kings, drew all the kingdoms after it—the fall of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17907:force, the defeat of war.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17909:In this event, stamped with superhuman necessity, the part played by
tests/les_miserables.txt:17912:If we take Waterloo from Wellington and Blücher, do we thereby deprive
tests/les_miserables.txt:17916:sword. Neither England, nor Germany, nor France is contained in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17917:scabbard. At this epoch when Waterloo is only a clashing of swords,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17918:above Blücher, Germany has Schiller; above Wellington, England has
tests/les_miserables.txt:17919:Byron. A vast dawn of ideas is the peculiarity of our century, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:17920:that aurora England and Germany have a magnificent radiance. They are
tests/les_miserables.txt:17921:majestic because they think. The elevation of level which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:17922:contribute to civilization is intrinsic with them; it proceeds from
tests/les_miserables.txt:17923:themselves and not from an accident. The aggrandizement which they have
tests/les_miserables.txt:17924:brought to the nineteenth century has not Waterloo as its source. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:17925:only barbarous peoples who undergo rapid growth after a victory. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:17927:people, especially in our day, are neither elevated nor abased by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17928:good or bad fortune of a captain. Their specific gravity in the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:17929:species results from something more than a combat. Their honor, thank
tests/les_miserables.txt:17930:God! their dignity, their intelligence, their genius, are not numbers
tests/les_miserables.txt:17931:which those gamblers, heroes and conquerors, can put in the lottery of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17932:battles. Often a battle is lost and progress is conquered. There is
tests/les_miserables.txt:17933:less glory and more liberty. The drum holds its peace; reason takes the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17934:word. It is a game in which he who loses wins. Let us, therefore, speak
tests/les_miserables.txt:17935:of Waterloo coldly from both sides. Let us render to chance that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:17936:is due to chance, and to God that which is due to God. What is
tests/les_miserables.txt:17937:Waterloo? A victory? No. The winning number in the lottery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17939:The quine 11 won by Europe, paid by France.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17941:It was not worthwhile to place a lion there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17943:Waterloo, moreover, is the strangest encounter in history. Napoleon and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17945:who is fond of antitheses, make a more striking contrast, a more
tests/les_miserables.txt:17946:extraordinary comparison. On one side, precision, foresight, geometry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17947:prudence, an assured retreat, reserves spared, with an obstinate
tests/les_miserables.txt:17948:coolness, an imperturbable method, strategy, which takes advantage of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17949:the ground, tactics, which preserve the equilibrium of battalions,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17950:carnage, executed according to rule, war regulated, watch in hand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17951:nothing voluntarily left to chance, the ancient classic courage,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17953:oddity, superhuman instinct, a flaming glance, an indescribable
tests/les_miserables.txt:17954:something which gazes like an eagle, and which strikes like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17956:mysteries of a profound soul, associated with destiny; the stream, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17957:plain, the forest, the hill, summoned, and in a manner, forced to obey,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17959:faith in a star mingled with strategic science, elevating but
tests/les_miserables.txt:17961:Michael Angelo; and on this occasion, genius was vanquished by
tests/les_miserables.txt:17962:calculation. On both sides some one was awaited. It was the exact
tests/les_miserables.txt:17963:calculator who succeeded. Napoleon was waiting for Grouchy; he did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:17964:come. Wellington expected Blücher; he came.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17966:Wellington is classic war taking its revenge. Bonaparte, at his
tests/les_miserables.txt:17967:dawning, had encountered him in Italy, and beaten him superbly. The old
tests/les_miserables.txt:17968:owl had fled before the young vulture. The old tactics had been not
tests/les_miserables.txt:17969:only struck as by lightning, but disgraced. Who was that Corsican of
tests/les_miserables.txt:17972:without ammunition, without cannon, without shoes, almost without an
tests/les_miserables.txt:17974:Europe combined, and absurdly won victories in the impossible? Whence
tests/les_miserables.txt:17975:had issued that fulminating convict, who almost without taking breath,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17976:and with the same set of combatants in hand, pulverized, one after the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17978:Alvinzi, Wurmser on Beaulieu, Mélas on Wurmser, Mack on Mélas? Who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:17979:this novice in war with the effrontery of a luminary? The academical
tests/les_miserables.txt:17980:military school excommunicated him, and as it lost its footing; hence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:17981:the implacable rancor of the old Cæsarism against the new; of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17982:regular sword against the flaming sword; and of the exchequer against
tests/les_miserables.txt:17983:genius. On the 18th of June, 1815, that rancor had the last word, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:17984:beneath Lodi, Montebello, Montenotte, Mantua, Arcola, it wrote:
tests/les_miserables.txt:17985:Waterloo. A triumph of the mediocres which is sweet to the majority.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17986:Destiny consented to this irony. In his decline, Napoleon found
tests/les_miserables.txt:17989:In fact, to get Wurmser, it sufficed to blanch the hair of Wellington.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17991:Waterloo is a battle of the first order, won by a captain of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17992:second.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17994:That which must be admired in the battle of Waterloo, is England; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:17996:thing about England there, no offence to her, was herself. It was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:17997:her captain; it was her army.
tests/les_miserables.txt:17999:Wellington, oddly ungrateful, declares in a letter to Lord Bathurst,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18000:that his army, the army which fought on the 18th of June, 1815, was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18006:hero like many another. Those Scotch Grays, those Horse Guards, those
tests/les_miserables.txt:18007:regiments of Maitland and of Mitchell, that infantry of Pack and Kempt,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18008:that cavalry of Ponsonby and Somerset, those Highlanders playing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18009:pibroch under the shower of grape-shot, those battalions of Rylandt,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18010:those utterly raw recruits, who hardly knew how to handle a musket
tests/les_miserables.txt:18012:what was grand. Wellington was tenacious; in that lay his merit, and we
tests/les_miserables.txt:18014:his cavalry would have been as solid as he. The iron soldier is worth
tests/les_miserables.txt:18015:as much as the Iron Duke. As for us, all our glorification goes to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18017:there be, it is to England that the trophy is due. The column of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18022:still cherishes, after her own 1688 and our 1789, the feudal illusion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18023:She believes in heredity and hierarchy. This people, surpassed by none
tests/les_miserables.txt:18030:had, it appears, saved the army, could not be mentioned by Lord Paglan,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18031:as the English military hierarchy does not permit any hero below the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18032:grade of an officer to be mentioned in the reports.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18034:That which we admire above all, in an encounter of the nature of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18035:Waterloo, is the marvellous cleverness of chance. A nocturnal rain, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18036:wall of Hougomont, the hollow road of Ohain, Grouchy deaf to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18037:cannon, Napoleon’s guide deceiving him, Bülow’s guide enlightening
tests/les_miserables.txt:18038:him,—the whole of this cataclysm is wonderfully conducted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18040:On the whole, let us say it plainly, it was more of a massacre than of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18043:Of all pitched battles, Waterloo is the one which has the smallest
tests/les_miserables.txt:18044:front for such a number of combatants. Napoleon three-quarters of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18045:league; Wellington, half a league; seventy-two thousand combatants on
tests/les_miserables.txt:18046:each side. From this denseness the carnage arose.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18048:The following calculation has been made, and the following proportion
tests/les_miserables.txt:18049:established: Loss of men: at Austerlitz, French, fourteen per cent;
tests/les_miserables.txt:18050:Russians, thirty per cent; Austrians, forty-four per cent. At Wagram,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18051:French, thirteen per cent; Austrians, fourteen. At the Moskowa, French,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18052:thirty-seven per cent; Russians, forty-four. At Bautzen, French,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18053:thirteen per cent; Russians and Prussians, fourteen. At Waterloo,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18054:French, fifty-six per cent; the Allies, thirty-one. Total for Waterloo,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18055:forty-one per cent; one hundred and forty-four thousand combatants;
tests/les_miserables.txt:18058:To-day the field of Waterloo has the calm which belongs to the earth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18062:traveller strolls there, if he listens, if he watches, if he dreams
tests/les_miserables.txt:18063:like Virgil in the fatal plains of Philippi, the hallucination of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18064:catastrophe takes possession of him. The frightful 18th of June lives
tests/les_miserables.txt:18065:again; the false monumental hillock disappears, the lion vanishes in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18069:of bombs, the tremendous interchange of thunders; he hears, as it were,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18070:the death rattle in the depths of a tomb, the vague clamor of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18072:cuirassiers; that skeleton Napoleon, that other skeleton is Wellington;
tests/les_miserables.txt:18073:all this no longer exists, and yet it clashes together and combats
tests/les_miserables.txt:18075:is fury even in the clouds and in the shadows; all those terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:18076:heights, Hougomont, Mont-Saint-Jean, Frischemont, Papelotte,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18077:Plancenoit, appear confusedly crowned with whirlwinds of spectres
tests/les_miserables.txt:18078:engaged in exterminating each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18086:There exists a very respectable liberal school which does not hate
tests/les_miserables.txt:18088:date of liberty. That such an eagle should emerge from such an egg is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18089:certainly unexpected.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18091:If one places one’s self at the culminating point of view of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18092:question, Waterloo is intentionally a counter-revolutionary victory. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:18093:is Europe against France; it is Petersburg, Berlin, and Vienna against
tests/les_miserables.txt:18095:July, 1789, attacked through the 20th of March, 1815; it is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18096:monarchies clearing the decks in opposition to the indomitable French
tests/les_miserables.txt:18097:rioting. The final extinction of that vast people which had been in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18098:eruption for twenty-six years—such was the dream. The solidarity of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18099:Brunswicks, the Nassaus, the Romanoffs, the Hohenzollerns, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18101:crupper. It is true, that the Empire having been despotic, the kingdom
tests/les_miserables.txt:18102:by the natural reaction of things, was forced to be liberal, and that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18103:constitutional order was the unwilling result of Waterloo, to the great
tests/les_miserables.txt:18104:regret of the conquerors. It is because revolution cannot be really
tests/les_miserables.txt:18105:conquered, and that being providential and absolutely fatal, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18106:always cropping up afresh: before Waterloo, in Bonaparte overthrowing
tests/les_miserables.txt:18108:conforming to the charter. Bonaparte places a postilion on the throne
tests/les_miserables.txt:18110:to demonstrate equality; Louis XVIII. at Saint-Ouen countersigns the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18111:declaration of the rights of man. If you wish to gain an idea of what
tests/les_miserables.txt:18112:revolution is, call it Progress; and if you wish to acquire an idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18113:the nature of progress, call it To-morrow. To-morrow fulfils its work
tests/les_miserables.txt:18114:irresistibly, and it is already fulfilling it to-day. It always reaches
tests/les_miserables.txt:18117:tribune. Thus does progress proceed. There is no such thing as a bad
tests/les_miserables.txt:18118:tool for that workman. It does not become disconcerted, but adjusts to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18121:well as of the conqueror; of the conqueror without, of the gouty man
tests/les_miserables.txt:18122:within. Waterloo, by cutting short the demolition of European thrones
tests/les_miserables.txt:18123:by the sword, had no other effect than to cause the revolutionary work
tests/les_miserables.txt:18124:to be continued in another direction. The slashers have finished; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:18125:was the turn of the thinkers. The century that Waterloo was intended to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18126:arrest has pursued its march. That sinister victory was vanquished by
tests/les_miserables.txt:18129:In short, and incontestably, that which triumphed at Waterloo; that
tests/les_miserables.txt:18130:which smiled in Wellington’s rear; that which brought him all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18131:marshals’ staffs of Europe, including, it is said, the staff of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18132:marshal of France; that which joyously trundled the barrows full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18133:bones to erect the knoll of the lion; that which triumphantly inscribed
tests/les_miserables.txt:18134:on that pedestal the date “_June_ 18, 1815”; that which encouraged
tests/les_miserables.txt:18135:Blücher, as he put the flying army to the sword; that which, from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18136:heights of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean, hovered over France as over
tests/les_miserables.txt:18137:its prey, was the counter-revolution. It was the counter-revolution
tests/les_miserables.txt:18138:which murmured that infamous word “dismemberment.” On arriving in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18139:Paris, it beheld the crater close at hand; it felt those ashes which
tests/les_miserables.txt:18140:scorched its feet, and it changed its mind; it returned to the stammer
tests/les_miserables.txt:18141:of a charter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18143:Let us behold in Waterloo only that which is in Waterloo. Of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18144:intentional liberty there is none. The counter-revolution was
tests/les_miserables.txt:18145:involuntarily liberal, in the same manner as, by a corresponding
tests/les_miserables.txt:18155:End of the dictatorship. A whole European system crumbled away.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18157:The Empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the Roman world as
tests/les_miserables.txt:18159:barbarians; only the barbarism of 1815, which must be called by its pet
tests/les_miserables.txt:18160:name of the counter-revolution, was not long breathed, soon fell to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18161:panting, and halted short. The Empire was bewept,—let us acknowledge
tests/les_miserables.txt:18162:the fact,—and bewept by heroic eyes. If glory lies in the sword
tests/les_miserables.txt:18163:converted into a sceptre, the Empire had been glory in person. It had
tests/les_miserables.txt:18164:diffused over the earth all the light which tyranny can give—a sombre
tests/les_miserables.txt:18165:light. We will say more; an obscure light. Compared to the true
tests/les_miserables.txt:18166:daylight, it is night. This disappearance of night produces the effect
tests/les_miserables.txt:18167:of an eclipse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18169:Louis XVIII. re-entered Paris. The circling dances of the 8th of July
tests/les_miserables.txt:18170:effaced the enthusiasms of the 20th of March. The Corsican became the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18172:white. The exile reigned. Hartwell’s pine table took its place in front
tests/les_miserables.txt:18174:were mentioned as though they had taken place on the preceding day,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18175:Austerlitz having become antiquated. The altar and the throne
tests/les_miserables.txt:18176:fraternized majestically. One of the most undisputed forms of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18177:health of society in the nineteenth century was established over
tests/les_miserables.txt:18178:France, and over the continent. Europe adopted the white cockade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18179:Trestaillon was celebrated. The device _non pluribus impar_ reappeared
tests/les_miserables.txt:18180:on the stone rays representing a sun upon the front of the barracks on
tests/les_miserables.txt:18182:a red house. The Arc du Carrousel, all laden with badly borne
tests/les_miserables.txt:18183:victories, thrown out of its element among these novelties, a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:18184:ashamed, it may be, of Marengo and Arcola, extricated itself from its
tests/les_miserables.txt:18185:predicament with the statue of the Duc d’Angoulême. The cemetery of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18186:Madeleine, a terrible pauper’s grave in 1793, was covered with jasper
tests/les_miserables.txt:18187:and marble, since the bones of Louis XVI. and Marie Antoinette lay in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18190:In the moat of Vincennes a sepulchral shaft sprang from the earth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18191:recalling the fact that the Duc d’Enghien had perished in the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:18192:month when Napoleon was crowned. Pope Pius VII., who had performed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18193:coronation very near this death, tranquilly bestowed his blessing on
tests/les_miserables.txt:18194:the fall as he had bestowed it on the elevation. At Schoenbrunn there
tests/les_miserables.txt:18195:was a little shadow, aged four, whom it was seditious to call the King
tests/les_miserables.txt:18196:of Rome. And these things took place, and the kings resumed their
tests/les_miserables.txt:18197:thrones, and the master of Europe was put in a cage, and the old regime
tests/les_miserables.txt:18198:became the new regime, and all the shadows and all the light of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18199:earth changed place, because, on the afternoon of a certain summer’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:18204:This 1815 was a sort of lugubrious April. Ancient unhealthy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:18205:poisonous realities were covered with new appearances. A lie wedded
tests/les_miserables.txt:18206:1789; the right divine was masked under a charter; fictions became
tests/les_miserables.txt:18207:constitutional; prejudices, superstitions and mental reservations, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:18208:Article 14 in the heart, were varnished over with liberalism. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:18209:the serpent’s change of skin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18212:reign of splendid matter, the ideal had received the strange name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18213:ideology! It is a grave imprudence in a great man to turn the future
tests/les_miserables.txt:18214:into derision. The populace, however, that food for cannon which is so
tests/les_miserables.txt:18215:fond of the cannoneer, sought him with its glance. Where is he? What is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18217:and Waterloo. “He dead!” cried the soldier; “you don’t know him.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:18220:remained long empty through Napoleon’s disappearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18222:The kings placed themselves in this void. Ancient Europe profited by it
tests/les_miserables.txt:18223:to undertake reforms. There was a Holy Alliance; _Belle-Alliance_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18224:Beautiful Alliance, the fatal field of Waterloo had said in advance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18226:In presence and in face of that antique Europe reconstructed, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18227:features of a new France were sketched out. The future, which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18230:Singular fact! people were, at one and the same time, in love with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18233:erect. Those who had triumphed were alarmed. England had him guarded by
tests/les_miserables.txt:18234:Hudson Lowe, and France had him watched by Montchenu. His folded arms
tests/les_miserables.txt:18235:became a source of uneasiness to thrones. Alexander called him “my
tests/les_miserables.txt:18237:revolution which was contained in him. That is what explains and
tests/les_miserables.txt:18238:excuses Bonapartist liberalism. This phantom caused the old world to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18239:tremble. The kings reigned, but ill at their ease, with the rock of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18244:rotting, and something of their peace was shed abroad over the world.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18245:The Congress of Vienna made the treaties in 1815, and Europe called
tests/les_miserables.txt:18250:But what matters it to the Infinite? all that tempest, all that cloud,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18251:that war, then that peace? All that darkness did not trouble for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18252:moment the light of that immense Eye before which a grub skipping from
tests/les_miserables.txt:18262:Let us return—it is a necessity in this book—to that fatal
tests/les_miserables.txt:18265:On the 18th of June the moon was full. Its light favored Blücher’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:18266:ferocious pursuit, betrayed the traces of the fugitives, delivered up
tests/les_miserables.txt:18267:that disastrous mass to the eager Prussian cavalry, and aided the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18268:massacre. Such tragic favors of the night do occur sometimes during
tests/les_miserables.txt:18269:catastrophes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18271:After the last cannon-shot had been fired, the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:18274:The English occupied the encampment of the French; it is the usual sign
tests/les_miserables.txt:18275:of victory to sleep in the bed of the vanquished. They established
tests/les_miserables.txt:18276:their bivouac beyond Rossomme. The Prussians, let loose on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18280:If ever the _sic vos non vobis_ was applicable, it certainly is to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:18282:the scene of action. Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded, Hougomont was
tests/les_miserables.txt:18284:Plancenoit was burned, La Belle-Alliance beheld the embrace of the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:18285:conquerors; these names are hardly known, and Waterloo, which worked
tests/les_miserables.txt:18288:We are not of the number of those who flatter war; when the occasion
tests/les_miserables.txt:18290:which we have not concealed; it has also, we acknowledge, some hideous
tests/les_miserables.txt:18292:bodies of the dead after the victory. The dawn which follows a battle
tests/les_miserables.txt:18293:always rises on naked corpses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18296:is that which is slipped into the pocket of victory? What pickpockets
tests/les_miserables.txt:18298:philosophers—Voltaire among the number—affirm that it is precisely
tests/les_miserables.txt:18300:there is no relief corps; those who are erect pillage those who are
tests/les_miserables.txt:18302:One has assuredly the right, after all, to strip a corpse a bit when
tests/les_miserables.txt:18303:one is the author of that corpse. For our own part, we do not think so;
tests/les_miserables.txt:18304:it seems to us impossible that the same hand should pluck laurels and
tests/les_miserables.txt:18307:One thing is certain, which is, that generally after conquerors follow
tests/les_miserables.txt:18308:thieves. But let us leave the soldier, especially the contemporary
tests/les_miserables.txt:18311:Every army has a rear-guard, and it is that which must be blamed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18312:Bat-like creatures, half brigands and lackeys; all the sorts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18313:vespertillos that that twilight called war engenders; wearers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18316:carts, sometimes accompanied by their wives, and stealing things which
tests/les_miserables.txt:18317:they sell again; beggars offering themselves as guides to officers;
tests/les_miserables.txt:18318:soldiers’ servants; marauders; armies on the march in days gone by,—we
tests/les_miserables.txt:18320:in the special language they are called “stragglers.” No army, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:18322:followed the Germans, then spoke French and followed the English. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:18323:was by one of these wretches, a Spanish straggler who spoke French,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18324:that the Marquis of Fervacques, deceived by his Picard jargon, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:18326:the battle-field itself, in the course of the night which followed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18327:victory of Cerisoles. The rascal sprang from this marauding. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:18328:detestable maxim, _Live on the enemy!_ produced this leprosy, which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18329:strict discipline alone could heal. There are reputations which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:18330:deceptive; one does not always know why certain generals, great in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18331:other directions, have been so popular. Turenne was adored by his
tests/les_miserables.txt:18332:soldiers because he tolerated pillage; evil permitted constitutes part
tests/les_miserables.txt:18335:were more or less in number, according as the chief was more or less
tests/les_miserables.txt:18336:severe. Hoche and Marceau had no stragglers; Wellington had few, and we
tests/les_miserables.txt:18337:do him the justice to mention it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18340:were robbed. Wellington was rigid; he gave orders that any one caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:18341:in the act should be shot; but rapine is tenacious. The marauders stole
tests/les_miserables.txt:18342:in one corner of the battlefield while others were being shot in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18347:Towards midnight, a man was prowling about, or rather, climbing in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18348:direction of the hollow road of Ohain. To all appearance he was one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18349:those whom we have just described,—neither English nor French, neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:18350:peasant nor soldier, less a man than a ghoul attracted by the scent of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18351:the dead bodies having theft for his victory, and come to rifle
tests/les_miserables.txt:18352:Waterloo. He was clad in a blouse that was something like a great coat;
tests/les_miserables.txt:18353:he was uneasy and audacious; he walked forwards and gazed behind him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18355:had no sack, but evidently he had large pockets under his coat. From
tests/les_miserables.txt:18356:time to time he halted, scrutinized the plain around him as though to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18359:motion, his attitudes, his mysterious and rapid gestures, caused him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18360:resemble those twilight larvæ which haunt ruins, and which ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:18361:Norman legends call the Alleurs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18363:Certain nocturnal wading birds produce these silhouettes among the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18366:A glance capable of piercing all that mist deeply would have perceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:18367:at some distance a sort of little sutler’s wagon with a fluted wicker
tests/les_miserables.txt:18368:hood, harnessed to a famished nag which was cropping the grass across
tests/les_miserables.txt:18369:its bit as it halted, hidden, as it were, behind the hovel which
tests/les_miserables.txt:18372:seated on coffers and packages. Perhaps there was some connection
tests/les_miserables.txt:18375:The darkness was serene. Not a cloud in the zenith. What matters it if
tests/les_miserables.txt:18376:the earth be red! the moon remains white; these are the indifferences
tests/les_miserables.txt:18377:of the sky. In the fields, branches of trees broken by grape-shot, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:18379:A breath, almost a respiration, moved the shrubbery. Quivers which
tests/les_miserables.txt:18382:In the distance the coming and going of patrols and the general rounds
tests/les_miserables.txt:18383:of the English camp were audible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18385:Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte continued to burn, forming, one in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18386:west, the other in the east, two great flames which were joined by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18387:cordon of bivouac fires of the English, like a necklace of rubies with
tests/les_miserables.txt:18388:two carbuncles at the extremities, as they extended in an immense
tests/les_miserables.txt:18389:semicircle over the hills along the horizon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18391:We have described the catastrophe of the road of Ohain. The heart is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18395:If there is anything terrible, if there exists a reality which
tests/les_miserables.txt:18397:possession of virile force; to possess health and joy; to laugh
tests/les_miserables.txt:18398:valiantly; to rush towards a glory which one sees dazzling in front of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18399:one; to feel in one’s breast lungs which breathe, a heart which beats,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18400:a will which reasons; to speak, think, hope, love; to have a mother, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18401:have a wife, to have children; to have the light—and all at once, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18402:the space of a shout, in less than a minute, to sink into an abyss; to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18403:fall, to roll, to crush, to be crushed; to see ears of wheat, flowers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18404:leaves, branches; not to be able to catch hold of anything; to feel
tests/les_miserables.txt:18406:in vain, since one’s bones have been broken by some kick in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18407:darkness; to feel a heel which makes one’s eyes start from their
tests/les_miserables.txt:18408:sockets; to bite horses’ shoes in one’s rage; to stifle, to yell, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18414:was silence now. The edges of the hollow road were encumbered with
tests/les_miserables.txt:18415:horses and riders, inextricably heaped up. Terrible entanglement! There
tests/les_miserables.txt:18416:was no longer any slope, for the corpses had levelled the road with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18417:plain, and reached the brim like a well-filled bushel of barley. A heap
tests/les_miserables.txt:18419:part—such was that road on the evening of the 18th of June, 1815. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:18421:pool in front of the abatis of trees which barred the way, at a spot
tests/les_miserables.txt:18422:which is still pointed out.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18425:direction of the Genappe road, that the destruction of the cuirassiers
tests/les_miserables.txt:18426:had taken place. The thickness of the layer of bodies was proportioned
tests/les_miserables.txt:18428:it became level, where Delort’s division had passed, the layer of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18429:corpses was thinner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18431:The nocturnal prowler whom we have just shown to the reader was going
tests/les_miserables.txt:18432:in that direction. He was searching that vast tomb. He gazed about. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:18436:All at once he paused.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18438:A few paces in front of him, in the hollow road, at the point where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18439:pile of dead came to an end, an open hand, illumined by the moon,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18440:projected from beneath that heap of men. That hand had on its finger
tests/les_miserables.txt:18441:something sparkling, which was a ring of gold.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18443:The man bent over, remained in a crouching attitude for a moment, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:18446:He did not precisely rise; he remained in a stooping and frightened
tests/les_miserables.txt:18447:attitude, with his back turned to the heap of dead, scanning the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18449:supported on his two forefingers, which rested on the earth, and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:18450:head peering above the edge of the hollow road. The jackal’s four paws
tests/les_miserables.txt:18451:suit some actions.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18453:Then coming to a decision, he rose to his feet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18455:At that moment, he gave a terrible start. He felt some one clutch him
tests/les_miserables.txt:18458:He wheeled round; it was the open hand, which had closed, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:18459:seized the skirt of his coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18467:But the hand weakened and released him. Effort is quickly exhausted in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18476:lifeless, or at least the unconscious, man, through the shadows of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18477:hollow road. He was a cuirassier, an officer, and even an officer of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18478:considerable rank; a large gold epaulette peeped from beneath the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18479:cuirass; this officer no longer possessed a helmet. A furious sword-cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:18480:had scarred his face, where nothing was discernible but blood.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18483:chance, if that word is permissible here, the dead had been vaulted
tests/les_miserables.txt:18484:above him in such a manner as to preserve him from being crushed. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:18485:eyes were still closed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18487:On his cuirass he wore the silver cross of the Legion of Honor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18489:The prowler tore off this cross, which disappeared into one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18490:gulfs which he had beneath his great coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18492:Then he felt of the officer’s fob, discovered a watch there, and took
tests/les_miserables.txt:18493:possession of it. Next he searched his waistcoat, found a purse and
tests/les_miserables.txt:18494:pocketed it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18496:When he had arrived at this stage of succor which he was administering
tests/les_miserables.txt:18497:to this dying man, the officer opened his eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18502:the freshness of the night, the air which he could inhale freely, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:18506:audible in the plain; some patrol was probably approaching.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18508:The officer murmured, for the death agony was still in his voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:18515:The officer went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:18517:“Look in my pockets; you will find a watch and a purse. Take them.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:18522:The prowler executed the required feint, and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:18527:“I have been robbed,” said the officer; “I am sorry for that. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:18531:The steps of the patrol became more and more distinct.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18533:“Some one is coming,” said the prowler, with the movement of a man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:18536:The officer raised his arm feebly, and detained him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18541:The prowler answered rapidly, and in a low voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:18543:“Like yourself, I belonged to the French army. I must leave you. If
tests/les_miserables.txt:18544:they were to catch me, they would shoot me. I have saved your life. Now
tests/les_miserables.txt:18545:get out of the scrape yourself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:18560:“I shall not forget that name,” said the officer; “and do you remember
tests/les_miserables.txt:18561:mine. My name is Pontmercy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:18575:Jean Valjean had been recaptured.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18578:details. We will confine ourselves to transcribing two paragraphs
tests/les_miserables.txt:18580:surprising events which had taken place at M. sur M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18582:These articles are rather summary. It must be remembered, that at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:18583:epoch the _Gazette des Tribunaux_ was not yet in existence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18585:We borrow the first from the _Drapeau Blanc_. It bears the date of July
tests/les_miserables.txt:18589:event quite out of the ordinary course. A man, who was a stranger in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18591:the new methods, resuscitated some years ago an ancient local industry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18592:the manufacture of jet and of black glass trinkets. He had made his
tests/les_miserables.txt:18594:will admit. He had been appointed mayor, in recognition of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:18595:services. The police discovered that M. Madeleine was no other than an
tests/les_miserables.txt:18596:ex-convict who had broken his ban, condemned in 1796 for theft, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:18597:named Jean Valjean. Jean Valjean has been recommitted to prison. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:18598:appears that previous to his arrest he had succeeded in withdrawing
tests/les_miserables.txt:18599:from the hands of M. Laffitte, a sum of over half a million which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:18600:had lodged there, and which he had, moreover, and by perfectly
tests/les_miserables.txt:18601:legitimate means, acquired in his business. No one has been able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18602:discover where Jean Valjean has concealed this money since his return
tests/les_miserables.txt:18605:The second article, which enters a little more into detail, is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:18606:extract from the _Journal de Paris_, of the same date.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18608:A former convict, who had been liberated, named Jean Valjean, has just
tests/les_miserables.txt:18609:appeared before the Court of Assizes of the Var, under circumstances
tests/les_miserables.txt:18610:calculated to attract attention. This wretch had succeeded in escaping
tests/les_miserables.txt:18611:the vigilance of the police, he had changed his name, and had succeeded
tests/les_miserables.txt:18613:in this town he had established a considerable commerce. He has at last
tests/les_miserables.txt:18615:public prosecutor. He had for his concubine a woman of the town, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:18616:died of a shock at the moment of his arrest. This scoundrel, who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18617:endowed with Herculean strength, found means to escape; but three or
tests/les_miserables.txt:18618:four days after his flight the police laid their hands on him once
tests/les_miserables.txt:18620:those little vehicles which run between the capital and the village of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18622:interval of three or four days of liberty, to withdraw a considerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:18624:estimated at six or seven hundred thousand francs. If the indictment is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18625:to be trusted, he has hidden it in some place known to himself alone,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18628:Department of the Var as accused of highway robbery accompanied with
tests/les_miserables.txt:18629:violence, about eight years ago, on the person of one of those honest
tests/les_miserables.txt:18630:children who, as the patriarch of Ferney has said, in immortal verse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18633:And who, with gentle hands, do clear
tests/les_miserables.txt:18634:Those long canals choked up with soot.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:18638:eloquent representative of the public prosecutor, that the theft was
tests/les_miserables.txt:18639:committed in complicity with others, and that Jean Valjean was a member
tests/les_miserables.txt:18640:of a band of robbers in the south. Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty
tests/les_miserables.txt:18641:and was condemned to the death penalty in consequence. This criminal
tests/les_miserables.txt:18642:refused to lodge an appeal. The king, in his inexhaustible clemency,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18643:has deigned to commute his penalty to that of penal servitude for life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18648:this commutation as a triumph of the priestly party.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18650:Jean Valjean changed his number in the galleys. He was called 9,430.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18652:However, and we will mention it at once in order that we may not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:18653:obliged to recur to the subject, the prosperity of M. sur M. vanished
tests/les_miserables.txt:18655:and hesitation was realized; lacking him, there actually was _a soul
tests/les_miserables.txt:18656:lacking_. After this fall, there took place at M. sur M. that
tests/les_miserables.txt:18657:egotistical division of great existences which have fallen, that fatal
tests/les_miserables.txt:18658:dismemberment of flourishing things which is accomplished every day,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18659:obscurely, in the human community, and which history has noted only
tests/les_miserables.txt:18660:once, because it occurred after the death of Alexander. Lieutenants are
tests/les_miserables.txt:18661:crowned kings; superintendents improvise manufacturers out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18663:shut; his buildings fell to ruin, his workmen were scattered. Some of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18664:them quitted the country, others abandoned the trade. Thenceforth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18665:everything was done on a small scale, instead of on a grand scale; for
tests/les_miserables.txt:18666:lucre instead of the general good. There was no longer a centre;
tests/les_miserables.txt:18667:everywhere there was competition and animosity. M. Madeleine had
tests/les_miserables.txt:18668:reigned over all and directed all. No sooner had he fallen, than each
tests/les_miserables.txt:18669:pulled things to himself; the spirit of combat succeeded to the spirit
tests/les_miserables.txt:18670:of organization, bitterness to cordiality, hatred of one another to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18671:benevolence of the founder towards all; the threads which M. Madeleine
tests/les_miserables.txt:18673:products were debased, confidence was killed; the market diminished,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18674:for lack of orders; salaries were reduced, the workshops stood still,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18675:bankruptcy arrived. And then there was nothing more for the poor. All
tests/les_miserables.txt:18678:The state itself perceived that some one had been crushed somewhere.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18681:benefit of the galleys, the cost of collecting taxes had doubled in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18682:arrondissement of M. sur M.; and M. de Villèle called attention to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18683:fact in the rostrum, in the month of February, 1827.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18692:Before proceeding further, it will be to the purpose to narrate in some
tests/les_miserables.txt:18693:detail, a singular occurrence which took place at about the same epoch,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18694:in Montfermeil, and which is not lacking in coincidence with certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:18695:conjectures of the indictment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18697:There exists in the region of Montfermeil a very ancient superstition,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18698:which is all the more curious and all the more precious, because a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18699:popular superstition in the vicinity of Paris is like an aloe in
tests/les_miserables.txt:18700:Siberia. We are among those who respect everything which is in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18702:it is thought that the devil, from time immemorial, has selected the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18703:forest as a hiding-place for his treasures. Goodwives affirm that it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18704:no rarity to encounter at nightfall, in secluded nooks of the forest, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18705:black man with the air of a carter or a wood-chopper, wearing wooden
tests/les_miserables.txt:18706:shoes, clad in trousers and a blouse of linen, and recognizable by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18707:fact, that, instead of a cap or hat, he has two immense horns on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:18708:head. This ought, in fact, to render him recognizable. This man is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18710:by such an encounter. The first is to approach the man and speak to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18712:black because it is nightfall; that he is not digging any hole
tests/les_miserables.txt:18713:whatever, but is cutting grass for his cows, and that what had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:18714:taken for horns is nothing but a dung-fork which he is carrying on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:18715:back, and whose teeth, thanks to the perspective of evening, seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18717:The second way is to watch him, to wait until he has dug his hole,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18719:to the trench, to open it once more and to seize the “treasure” which
tests/les_miserables.txt:18720:the black man has necessarily placed there. In this case one dies
tests/les_miserables.txt:18721:within the month. Finally, the last method is not to speak to the black
tests/les_miserables.txt:18725:As all three methods are attended with their special inconveniences,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18726:the second, which at all events, presents some advantages, among others
tests/les_miserables.txt:18728:generally adopted. So bold men, who are tempted by every chance, have
tests/les_miserables.txt:18729:quite frequently, as we are assured, opened the holes excavated by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18730:black man, and tried to rob the devil. The success of the operation
tests/les_miserables.txt:18732:believed, and in particular the two enigmatical lines in barbarous
tests/les_miserables.txt:18733:Latin, which an evil Norman monk, a bit of a sorcerer, named Tryphon
tests/les_miserables.txt:18734:has left on this subject. This Tryphon is buried at the Abbey of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18735:Saint-Georges de Bocherville, near Rouen, and toads spawn on his grave.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18737:Accordingly, enormous efforts are made. Such trenches are ordinarily
tests/les_miserables.txt:18739:at night; he wets his shirt, burns out his candle, breaks his mattock,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18742:sometimes a crown-piece, a stone, a skeleton, a bleeding body,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18743:sometimes a spectre folded in four like a sheet of paper in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18745:announce to the indiscreet and curious:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:18747:“Fodit, et in fossa thesauros condit opaca,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18748:As, nummas, lapides, cadaver, simulacra, nihilque.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:18752:bullets, sometimes an old pack of cards greasy and worn, which has
tests/les_miserables.txt:18753:evidently served the devil. Tryphon does not record these two finds,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18754:since Tryphon lived in the twelfth century, and since the devil does
tests/les_miserables.txt:18755:not appear to have had the wit to invent powder before Roger Bacon’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:18756:time, and cards before the time of Charles VI.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18758:Moreover, if one plays at cards, one is sure to lose all that one
tests/les_miserables.txt:18760:of making your gun burst in your face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18762:Now, a very short time after the epoch when it seemed to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18763:prosecuting attorney that the liberated convict Jean Valjean during his
tests/les_miserables.txt:18765:remarked in that village that a certain old road-laborer, named
tests/les_miserables.txt:18766:Boulatruelle, had “peculiar ways” in the forest. People thereabouts
tests/les_miserables.txt:18768:was subjected to certain police supervision, and, as he could find work
tests/les_miserables.txt:18769:nowhere, the administration employed him at reduced rates as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18770:road-mender on the crossroad from Gagny to Lagny.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18773:inhabitants of the district as too respectful, too humble, too prompt
tests/les_miserables.txt:18774:in removing his cap to every one, and trembling and smiling in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18775:presence of the gendarmes,—probably affiliated to robber bands, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:18776:said; suspected of lying in ambush at verge of copses at nightfall. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:18779:This is what people thought they had noticed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:18782:and care of the road at a very early hour, and to betaking himself to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18783:the forest with his pickaxe. He was encountered towards evening in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18784:most deserted clearings, in the wildest thickets; and he had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18785:appearance of being in search of something, and sometimes he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:18787:Beelzebub; then they recognized Boulatruelle, and were not in the least
tests/les_miserables.txt:18788:reassured thereby. These encounters seemed to cause Boulatruelle a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18792:It was said in the village: “It is clear that the devil has appeared.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18793:Boulatruelle has seen him, and is on the search. In sooth, he is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18794:cunning enough to pocket Lucifer’s hoard.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:18797:The Voltairians added, “Will Boulatruelle catch the devil, or will the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18798:devil catch Boulatruelle?” The old women made a great many signs of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18799:cross.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18801:In the meantime, Boulatruelle’s manœuvres in the forest ceased; and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:18802:resumed his regular occupation of roadmending; and people gossiped of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18805:Some persons, however, were still curious, surmising that in all this
tests/les_miserables.txt:18808:bank-bills, and that the road-mender had half discovered the secret.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18809:The most “puzzled” were the schoolmaster and Thénardier, the proprietor
tests/les_miserables.txt:18817:One evening the schoolmaster affirmed that in former times the law
tests/les_miserables.txt:18819:forest, and that the latter would have been forced to speak, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:18820:he would have been put to the torture in case of need, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:18826:combined with admirable art, and in masterly proportions, the thirst of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18827:a gormandizer with the discretion of a judge. Nevertheless, by dint of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18828:returning to the charge and of comparing and putting together the few
tests/les_miserables.txt:18829:obscure words which he did allow to escape him, this is what Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:18830:and the schoolmaster imagined that they had made out:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:18834:underbrush, a shovel and a pickaxe, _concealed, as one might say_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18837:pick of Father Six-Fours, the water-carrier, and would have thought no
tests/les_miserables.txt:18840:belong in those parts, and whom he, Boulatruelle, knew well,” directing
tests/les_miserables.txt:18842:Thénardier: _A comrade of the galleys_. Boulatruelle obstinately
tests/les_miserables.txt:18843:refused to reveal his name. This person carried a package—something
tests/les_miserables.txt:18846:eight minutes that the idea of following that “person” had occurred to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18847:him. But it was too late; the person was already in the thicket, night
tests/les_miserables.txt:18848:had descended, and Boulatruelle had not been able to catch up with him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18849:Then he had adopted the course of watching for him at the edge of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18851:seen this person emerge from the brushwood, carrying no longer the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18852:coffer, but a shovel and pick. Boulatruelle had allowed the person to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18853:pass, and had not dreamed of accosting him, because he said to himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:18855:a pickaxe, and that he would probably knock him over the head on
tests/les_miserables.txt:18856:recognizing him, and on perceiving that he was recognized. Touching
tests/les_miserables.txt:18857:effusion of two old comrades on meeting again. But the shovel and pick
tests/les_miserables.txt:18859:thicket in the morning, and had found neither shovel nor pick. From
tests/les_miserables.txt:18860:this he had drawn the inference that this person, once in the forest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18861:had dug a hole with his pick, buried the coffer, and reclosed the hole
tests/les_miserables.txt:18862:with his shovel. Now, the coffer was too small to contain a body;
tests/les_miserables.txt:18863:therefore it contained money. Hence his researches. Boulatruelle had
tests/les_miserables.txt:18864:explored, sounded, searched the entire forest and the thicket, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:18865:dug wherever the earth appeared to him to have been recently turned up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18870:certain that the mender on the Gagny road did not take all that trouble
tests/les_miserables.txt:18871:for nothing; he was sure that the devil had come.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:18881:Towards the end of October, in that same year, 1823, the inhabitants of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18883:the purpose of repairing some damages, of the ship _Orion_, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:18884:employed later at Brest as a school-ship, and which then formed a part
tests/les_miserables.txt:18888:roughly,—produced a fine effect as it entered the roads. It flew some
tests/les_miserables.txt:18889:colors which procured for it the regulation salute of eleven guns,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18890:which it returned, shot for shot; total, twenty-two. It has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:18891:calculated that what with salvos, royal and military politenesses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18892:courteous exchanges of uproar, signals of etiquette, formalities of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18893:roadsteads and citadels, sunrises and sunsets, saluted every day by all
tests/les_miserables.txt:18894:fortresses and all ships of war, openings and closings of ports, etc.,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18895:the civilized world, discharged all over the earth, in the course of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18897:six francs the shot, that comes to nine hundred thousand francs a day,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18898:three hundred millions a year, which vanish in smoke. This is a mere
tests/les_miserables.txt:18901:The year 1823 was what the Restoration called “the epoch of the Spanish
tests/les_miserables.txt:18905:This war contained many events in one, and a quantity of peculiarities.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18906:A grand family affair for the house of Bourbon; the branch of France
tests/les_miserables.txt:18907:succoring and protecting the branch of Madrid, that is to say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18908:performing an act devolving on the elder; an apparent return to our
tests/les_miserables.txt:18909:national traditions, complicated by servitude and by subjection to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18910:cabinets of the North; M. le Duc d’Angoulême, surnamed by the liberal
tests/les_miserables.txt:18911:sheets _the hero of Andujar_, compressing in a triumphal attitude that
tests/les_miserables.txt:18912:was somewhat contradicted by his peaceable air, the ancient and very
tests/les_miserables.txt:18913:powerful terrorism of the Holy Office at variance with the chimerical
tests/les_miserables.txt:18914:terrorism of the liberals; the _sansculottes_ resuscitated, to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18915:great terror of dowagers, under the name of _descamisados_; monarchy
tests/les_miserables.txt:18916:opposing an obstacle to progress described as anarchy; the theories of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18917:’89 roughly interrupted in the sap; a European halt, called to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18918:French idea, which was making the tour of the world; beside the son of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18919:France as generalissimo, the Prince de Carignan, afterwards Charles
tests/les_miserables.txt:18920:Albert, enrolling himself in that crusade of kings against people as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18922:Empire setting out on a fresh campaign, but aged, saddened, after eight
tests/les_miserables.txt:18923:years of repose, and under the white cockade; the tricolored standard
tests/les_miserables.txt:18924:waved abroad by a heroic handful of Frenchmen, as the white standard
tests/les_miserables.txt:18927:bayonets; principles slaughtered by cannonades; France undoing by her
tests/les_miserables.txt:18928:arms that which she had done by her mind; in addition to this, hostile
tests/les_miserables.txt:18929:leaders sold, soldiers hesitating, cities besieged by millions; no
tests/les_miserables.txt:18930:military perils, and yet possible explosions, as in every mine which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:18932:for some, glory for no one. Such was this war, made by the princes
tests/les_miserables.txt:18933:descended from Louis XIV., and conducted by generals who had been under
tests/les_miserables.txt:18934:Napoleon. Its sad fate was to recall neither the grand war nor grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:18935:politics.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18937:Some feats of arms were serious; the taking of the Trocadéro, among
tests/les_miserables.txt:18938:others, was a fine military action; but after all, we repeat, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18939:trumpets of this war give back a cracked sound, the whole effect was
tests/les_miserables.txt:18940:suspicious; history approves of France for making a difficulty about
tests/les_miserables.txt:18941:accepting this false triumph. It seemed evident that certain Spanish
tests/les_miserables.txt:18942:officers charged with resistance yielded too easily; the idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18943:corruption was connected with the victory; it appears as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:18944:generals and not battles had been won, and the conquering soldier
tests/les_miserables.txt:18945:returned humiliated. A debasing war, in short, in which the _Bank of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18946:France_ could be read in the folds of the flag.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18949:ruin, frowned in 1823 at the easy surrender of citadels, and began to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18950:regret Palafox. It is the nature of France to prefer to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:18951:Rostopchine rather than Ballesteros in front of her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18953:From a still more serious point of view, and one which it is also
tests/les_miserables.txt:18954:proper to insist upon here, this war, which wounded the military spirit
tests/les_miserables.txt:18955:of France, enraged the democratic spirit. It was an enterprise of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18956:enthralment. In that campaign, the object of the French soldier, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18957:son of democracy, was the conquest of a yoke for others. A hideous
tests/les_miserables.txt:18958:contradiction. France is made to arouse the soul of nations, not to
tests/les_miserables.txt:18959:stifle it. All the revolutions of Europe since 1792 are the French
tests/les_miserables.txt:18960:Revolution: liberty darts rays from France. That is a solar fact. Blind
tests/les_miserables.txt:18964:at the same time, an outrage on the French Revolution. It was France
tests/les_miserables.txt:18965:who committed this monstrous violence; by foul means, for, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18966:exception of wars of liberation, everything that armies do is by foul
tests/les_miserables.txt:18967:means. The words _passive obedience_ indicate this. An army is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18968:strange masterpiece of combination where force results from an enormous
tests/les_miserables.txt:18969:sum of impotence. Thus is war, made by humanity against humanity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:18973:for a success. They did not perceive the danger that lies in having an
tests/les_miserables.txt:18974:idea slain to order. They went astray, in their innocence, to such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18975:degree that they introduced the immense enfeeblement of a crime into
tests/les_miserables.txt:18977:entered into their politics. 1830 had its germ in 1823. The Spanish
tests/les_miserables.txt:18978:campaign became in their counsels an argument for force and for
tests/les_miserables.txt:18979:adventures by right Divine. France, having re-established _el rey
tests/les_miserables.txt:18981:home. They fell into the alarming error of taking the obedience of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:18982:soldier for the consent of the nation. Such confidence is the ruin of
tests/les_miserables.txt:18984:machineel tree, nor in the shadow of an army.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18988:During the operations of the army commanded by the prince
tests/les_miserables.txt:18989:generalissimo, a squadron had been cruising in the Mediterranean. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:18991:accidents of the sea had brought it into port at Toulon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:18993:The presence of a vessel of war in a port has something about it which
tests/les_miserables.txt:18994:attracts and engages a crowd. It is because it is great, and the crowd
tests/les_miserables.txt:18997:A ship of the line is one of the most magnificent combinations of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19000:A ship of the line is composed, at the same time, of the heaviest and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19002:with three forms of substance,—solid, liquid, and fluid,—and it must do
tests/les_miserables.txt:19003:battle with all three. It has eleven claws of iron with which to seize
tests/les_miserables.txt:19005:than winged insects, to catch the wind in the clouds. Its breath pours
tests/les_miserables.txt:19006:out through its hundred and twenty cannons as through enormous
tests/les_miserables.txt:19007:trumpets, and replies proudly to the thunder. The ocean seeks to lead
tests/les_miserables.txt:19009:its soul, its compass, which counsels it and always shows it the north.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19010:In the blackest nights, its lanterns supply the place of the stars.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19011:Thus, against the wind, it has its cordage and its canvas; against the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19012:water, wood; against the rocks, its iron, brass, and lead; against the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19015:If one wishes to form an idea of all those gigantic proportions which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19016:taken as a whole, constitute the ship of the line, one has only to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19017:enter one of the six-story covered construction stocks, in the ports of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19018:Brest or Toulon. The vessels in process of construction are under a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19019:bell-glass there, as it were. This colossal beam is a yard; that great
tests/les_miserables.txt:19020:column of wood which stretches out on the earth as far as the eye can
tests/les_miserables.txt:19021:reach is the main-mast. Taking it from its root in the stocks to its
tests/les_miserables.txt:19022:tip in the clouds, it is sixty fathoms long, and its diameter at its
tests/les_miserables.txt:19025:fathers employed cables, ours employs chains. The simple pile of chains
tests/les_miserables.txt:19027:and eight feet in depth. And how much wood is required to make this
tests/les_miserables.txt:19028:ship? Three thousand cubic metres. It is a floating forest.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19032:steam, then in its infancy, has since added new miracles to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:19033:prodigy which is called a war vessel. At the present time, for example,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19034:the mixed vessel with a screw is a surprising machine, propelled by
tests/les_miserables.txt:19035:three thousand square metres of canvas and by an engine of two thousand
tests/les_miserables.txt:19038:Not to mention these new marvels, the ancient vessel of Christopher
tests/les_miserables.txt:19039:Columbus and of De Ruyter is one of the masterpieces of man. It is as
tests/les_miserables.txt:19040:inexhaustible in force as is the Infinite in gales; it stores up the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19041:wind in its sails, it is precise in the immense vagueness of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19044:There comes an hour, nevertheless, when the gale breaks that sixty-foot
tests/les_miserables.txt:19046:tall, when that anchor, which weighs tens of thousands, is twisted in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19048:when those monstrous cannons utter plaintive and futile roars, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:19049:the hurricane bears forth into the void and into night, when all that
tests/les_miserables.txt:19050:power and all that majesty are engulfed in a power and majesty which
tests/les_miserables.txt:19053:Every time that immense force is displayed to culminate in an immense
tests/les_miserables.txt:19054:feebleness it affords men food for thought. Hence in the ports curious
tests/les_miserables.txt:19055:people abound around these marvellous machines of war and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19056:navigation, without being able to explain perfectly to themselves why.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19057:Every day, accordingly, from morning until night, the quays, sluices,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19058:and the jetties of the port of Toulon were covered with a multitude of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19059:idlers and loungers, as they say in Paris, whose business consisted in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19063:course of its previous cruises thick layers of barnacles had collected
tests/les_miserables.txt:19064:on its keel to such a degree as to deprive it of half its speed; it had
tests/les_miserables.txt:19065:gone into the dry dock the year before this, in order to have the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19066:barnacles scraped off, then it had put to sea again; but this cleaning
tests/les_miserables.txt:19067:had affected the bolts of the keel: in the neighborhood of the Balearic
tests/les_miserables.txt:19070:violent equinoctial gale had come up, which had first staved in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19072:foretop-gallant-shrouds; in consequence of these injuries, the _Orion_
tests/les_miserables.txt:19073:had run back to Toulon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19075:It anchored near the Arsenal; it was fully equipped, and repairs were
tests/les_miserables.txt:19076:begun. The hull had received no damage on the starboard, but some of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19077:the planks had been unnailed here and there, according to custom, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19080:One morning the crowd which was gazing at it witnessed an accident.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19082:[Illustration: The Ship Orion, an Accident]
tests/les_miserables.txt:19084:The crew was busy bending the sails; the topman, who had to take the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19085:upper corner of the main-top-sail on the starboard, lost his balance;
tests/les_miserables.txt:19087:a cry; the man’s head overbalanced his body; the man fell around the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19088:yard, with his hands outstretched towards the abyss; on his way he
tests/les_miserables.txt:19091:shock of his fall had imparted to the foot-rope a violent swinging
tests/les_miserables.txt:19092:motion; the man swayed back and forth at the end of that rope, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19095:It was incurring a frightful risk to go to his assistance; not one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19096:the sailors, all fishermen of the coast, recently levied for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19097:service, dared to attempt it. In the meantime, the unfortunate topman
tests/les_miserables.txt:19098:was losing his strength; his anguish could not be discerned on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:19099:face, but his exhaustion was visible in every limb; his arms were
tests/les_miserables.txt:19100:contracted in horrible twitchings; every effort which he made to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19101:re-ascend served but to augment the oscillations of the foot-rope; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:19105:seen. There are moments when a bit of rope, a pole, the branch of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19107:detach himself from it and fall like a ripe fruit.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19109:All at once a man was seen climbing into the rigging with the agility
tests/les_miserables.txt:19110:of a tiger-cat; this man was dressed in red; he was a convict; he wore
tests/les_miserables.txt:19111:a green cap; he was a life convict. On arriving on a level with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19112:top, a gust of wind carried away his cap, and allowed a perfectly white
tests/les_miserables.txt:19115:A convict employed on board with a detachment from the galleys had, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19116:fact, at the very first instant, hastened to the officer of the watch,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19117:and, in the midst of the consternation and the hesitation of the crew,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19118:while all the sailors were trembling and drawing back, he had asked the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19119:officer’s permission to risk his life to save the topman; at an
tests/les_miserables.txt:19120:affirmative sign from the officer he had broken the chain riveted to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19121:his ankle with one blow of a hammer, then he had caught up a rope, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19122:had dashed into the rigging: no one noticed, at the instant, with what
tests/les_miserables.txt:19123:ease that chain had been broken; it was only later on that the incident
tests/les_miserables.txt:19124:was recalled.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19126:In a twinkling he was on the yard; he paused for a few seconds and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19127:appeared to be measuring it with his eye; these seconds, during which
tests/les_miserables.txt:19129:centuries to those who were looking on. At last, the convict raised his
tests/les_miserables.txt:19130:eyes to heaven and advanced a step: the crowd drew a long breath. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:19132:fastened the rope which he had brought to it, and allowed the other end
tests/les_miserables.txt:19133:to hang down, then he began to descend the rope, hand over hand, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19134:then,—and the anguish was indescribable,—instead of one man suspended
tests/les_miserables.txt:19137:One would have said it was a spider coming to seize a fly, only here
tests/les_miserables.txt:19138:the spider brought life, not death. Ten thousand glances were fastened
tests/les_miserables.txt:19139:on this group; not a cry, not a word; the same tremor contracted every
tests/les_miserables.txt:19141:slightest puff to the wind which was swaying the two unfortunate men.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19143:In the meantime, the convict had succeeded in lowering himself to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19146:the abyss. The convict had moored him securely with the cord to which
tests/les_miserables.txt:19147:he clung with one hand, while he was working with the other. At last,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19148:he was seen to climb back on the yard, and to drag the sailor up after
tests/les_miserables.txt:19149:him; he held him there a moment to allow him to recover his strength,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19150:then he grasped him in his arms and carried him, walking on the yard
tests/les_miserables.txt:19151:himself to the cap, and from there to the main-top, where he left him
tests/les_miserables.txt:19152:in the hands of his comrades.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19154:At that moment the crowd broke into applause: old convict-sergeants
tests/les_miserables.txt:19155:among them wept, and women embraced each other on the quay, and all
tests/les_miserables.txt:19156:voices were heard to cry with a sort of tender rage, “Pardon for that
tests/les_miserables.txt:19160:He, in the meantime, had immediately begun to make his descent to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19161:rejoin his detachment. In order to reach them the more speedily, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:19163:eyes were following him. At a certain moment fear assailed them;
tests/les_miserables.txt:19165:thought they saw him hesitate and stagger. All at once the crowd
tests/les_miserables.txt:19166:uttered a loud shout: the convict had fallen into the sea.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19168:The fall was perilous. The frigate _Algésiras_ was anchored alongside
tests/les_miserables.txt:19169:the _Orion_, and the poor convict had fallen between the two vessels:
tests/les_miserables.txt:19171:Four men flung themselves hastily into a boat; the crowd cheered them
tests/les_miserables.txt:19173:to the surface; he had disappeared in the sea without leaving a ripple,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19174:as though he had fallen into a cask of oil: they sounded, they dived.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19175:In vain. The search was continued until the evening: they did not even
tests/les_miserables.txt:19180:“Nov. 17, 1823. Yesterday, a convict belonging to the detachment on
tests/les_miserables.txt:19181:board of the _Orion_, on his return from rendering assistance to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19184:Arsenal point: this man was committed under the number 9,430, and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:19200:of that lofty table-land which separates the Ourcq from the Marne. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:19204:well-satisfied citizens: it was only a village in the forest. Some
tests/les_miserables.txt:19205:pleasure-houses of the last century were to be met with there, to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:19206:sure, which were recognizable by their grand air, their balconies in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19207:twisted iron, and their long windows, whose tiny panes cast all sorts
tests/les_miserables.txt:19208:of varying shades of green on the white of the closed shutters; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:19209:Montfermeil was nonetheless a village. Retired cloth-merchants and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19210:rusticating attorneys had not discovered it as yet; it was a peaceful
tests/les_miserables.txt:19211:and charming place, which was not on the road to anywhere: there people
tests/les_miserables.txt:19212:lived, and cheaply, that peasant rustic life which is so bounteous and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19213:so easy; only, water was rare there, on account of the elevation of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19216:It was necessary to fetch it from a considerable distance; the end of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19217:the village towards Gagny drew its water from the magnificent ponds
tests/les_miserables.txt:19218:which exist in the woods there. The other end, which surrounds the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19219:church and which lies in the direction of Chelles, found drinking-water
tests/les_miserables.txt:19223:Thus each household found it hard work to keep supplied with water. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:19224:large houses, the aristocracy, of which the Thénardier tavern formed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19225:part, paid half a farthing a bucketful to a man who made a business of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19228:seven o’clock in the evening in summer, and five in winter; and night
tests/les_miserables.txt:19229:once come and the shutters on the ground floor once closed, he who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:19230:no water to drink went to fetch it for himself or did without it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19232:This constituted the terror of the poor creature whom the reader has
tests/les_miserables.txt:19235:pay them, and they made the child serve them. So when the mother ceased
tests/les_miserables.txt:19236:to pay altogether, the reason for which we have read in preceding
tests/les_miserables.txt:19237:chapters, the Thénardiers kept Cosette. She took the place of a servant
tests/les_miserables.txt:19238:in their house. In this capacity she it was who ran to fetch water when
tests/les_miserables.txt:19239:it was required. So the child, who was greatly terrified at the idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19240:going to the spring at night, took great care that water should never
tests/les_miserables.txt:19241:be lacking in the house.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19243:Christmas of the year 1823 was particularly brilliant at Montfermeil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19246:permission of the mayor to erect their booths in the principal street
tests/les_miserables.txt:19247:of the village, and a band of itinerant merchants, under protection of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19248:the same tolerance, had constructed their stalls on the Church Square,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19251:filled the inns and drinking-shops, and communicated to that tranquil
tests/les_miserables.txt:19252:little district a noisy and joyous life. In order to play the part of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19253:faithful historian, we ought even to add that, among the curiosities
tests/les_miserables.txt:19254:displayed in the square, there was a menagerie, in which frightful
tests/les_miserables.txt:19255:clowns, clad in rags and coming no one knew whence, exhibited to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19257:vultures, such as our Royal Museum did not possess until 1845, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19258:which have a tricolored cockade for an eye. I believe that naturalists
tests/les_miserables.txt:19259:call this bird Caracara Polyborus; it belongs to the order of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19260:Apicides, and to the family of the vultures. Some good old Bonapartist
tests/les_miserables.txt:19261:soldiers, who had retired to the village, went to see this creature
tests/les_miserables.txt:19262:with great devotion. The mountebanks gave out that the tricolored
tests/les_miserables.txt:19263:cockade was a unique phenomenon made by God expressly for their
tests/les_miserables.txt:19266:On Christmas eve itself, a number of men, carters, and peddlers, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:19267:seated at table, drinking and smoking around four or five candles in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19268:the public room of Thénardier’s hostelry. This room resembled all
tests/les_miserables.txt:19271:was indicated, nevertheless, by two objects which were then fashionable
tests/les_miserables.txt:19272:in the bourgeois class: to wit, a kaleidoscope and a lamp of ribbed
tests/les_miserables.txt:19273:tin. The female Thénardier was attending to the supper, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:19274:roasting in front of a clear fire; her husband was drinking with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:19275:customers and talking politics.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19277:Besides political conversations which had for their principal subjects
tests/les_miserables.txt:19278:the Spanish war and M. le Duc d’Angoulême, strictly local parentheses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19282:ten pieces were reckoned on there have been twelve. They have yielded a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19283:great deal of juice under the press.” “But the grapes cannot be ripe?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:19285:soon as spring comes.” “Then it is very thin wine?” “There are wines
tests/les_miserables.txt:19286:poorer even than these. The grapes must be gathered while green.” Etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19288:Or a miller would call out:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:19290:“Are we responsible for what is in the sacks? We find in them a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19291:quantity of small seed which we cannot sift out, and which we are
tests/les_miserables.txt:19293:vetches, hempseed, fox-tail, and a host of other weeds, not to mention
tests/les_miserables.txt:19294:pebbles, which abound in certain wheat, especially in Breton wheat. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:19296:to saw beams with nails in them. You can judge of the bad dust that
tests/les_miserables.txt:19297:makes in grinding. And then people complain of the flour. They are in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19301:In a space between two windows a mower, who was seated at table with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19302:landed proprietor who was fixing on a price for some meadow work to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:19305:“It does no harm to have the grass wet. It cuts better. Dew is a good
tests/les_miserables.txt:19306:thing, sir. It makes no difference with that grass. Your grass is young
tests/les_miserables.txt:19307:and very hard to cut still. It’s terribly tender. It yields before the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19308:iron.” Etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19310:Cosette was in her usual place, seated on the cross-bar of the kitchen
tests/les_miserables.txt:19311:table near the chimney. She was in rags; her bare feet were thrust into
tests/les_miserables.txt:19313:stockings destined for the young Thénardiers. A very young kitten was
tests/les_miserables.txt:19314:playing about among the chairs. Laughter and chatter were audible in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19315:the adjoining room, from two fresh children’s voices: it was Éponine
tests/les_miserables.txt:19318:In the chimney-corner a cat-o’-nine-tails was hanging on a nail.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19320:At intervals the cry of a very young child, which was somewhere in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19322:had been born to the Thénardiers during one of the preceding
tests/les_miserables.txt:19324:cold,”—and who was a little more than three years old. The mother had
tests/les_miserables.txt:19325:nursed him, but she did not love him. When the persistent clamor of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19326:brat became too annoying, “Your son is squalling,” Thénardier would
tests/les_miserables.txt:19328:bothers me.” And the neglected child continued to shriek in the dark.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19337:the moment has arrived for making the circuit of this couple, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19338:considering it under all its aspects.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19341:approaching her forties, which is equivalent to fifty in a woman; so
tests/les_miserables.txt:19342:that there existed a balance of age between husband and wife.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19344:Our readers have possibly preserved some recollection of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:19345:Thénardier woman, ever since her first appearance,—tall, blond, red,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19347:said, to the race of those colossal wild women, who contort themselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:19349:about the house,—made the beds, did the washing, the cooking, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19350:everything else. Cosette was her only servant; a mouse in the service
tests/les_miserables.txt:19351:of an elephant. Everything trembled at the sound of her voice,—window
tests/les_miserables.txt:19352:panes, furniture, and people. Her big face, dotted with red blotches,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19353:presented the appearance of a skimmer. She had a beard. She was an
tests/les_miserables.txt:19354:ideal market-porter dressed in woman’s clothes. She swore splendidly;
tests/les_miserables.txt:19355:she boasted of being able to crack a nut with one blow of her fist.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19356:Except for the romances which she had read, and which made the affected
tests/les_miserables.txt:19358:would never have occurred to any one to say of her, “That is a woman.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:19359:This Thénardier female was like the product of a wench engrafted on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19361:when one saw her drink, one said, “That is a carter”; when one saw her
tests/les_miserables.txt:19363:projected when her face was in repose.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19366:a sickly air and who was wonderfully healthy. His cunning began here;
tests/les_miserables.txt:19367:he smiled habitually, by way of precaution, and was almost polite to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19369:had the glance of a pole-cat and the bearing of a man of letters. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:19370:greatly resembled the portraits of the Abbé Delille. His coquetry
tests/les_miserables.txt:19371:consisted in drinking with the carters. No one had ever succeeded in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19373:his blouse an old black coat. He made pretensions to literature and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19374:materialism. There were certain names which he often pronounced to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19376:and, singularly enough, Saint Augustine. He declared that he had “a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19378:[philosophe], a scientific thief. The species does exist. It will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:19380:habit of relating with exuberance, how, being a sergeant in the 6th or
tests/les_miserables.txt:19382:presence of a squadron of death-dealing hussars, covered with his body
tests/les_miserables.txt:19384:had been dangerously wounded.” Thence arose for his wall the flaring
tests/les_miserables.txt:19385:sign, and for his inn the name which it bore in the neighborhood, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19386:“the cabaret of the Sergeant of Waterloo.” He was a liberal, a classic,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19387:and a Bonapartist. He had subscribed for the Champ d’Asile. It was said
tests/les_miserables.txt:19391:This rascal of composite order was, in all probability, some Fleming
tests/les_miserables.txt:19392:from Lille, in Flanders, a Frenchman in Paris, a Belgian at Brussels,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19393:being comfortably astride of both frontiers. As for his prowess at
tests/les_miserables.txt:19394:Waterloo, the reader is already acquainted with that. It will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:19395:perceived that he exaggerated it a trifle. Ebb and flow, wandering,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19396:adventure, was the leven of his existence; a tattered conscience
tests/les_miserables.txt:19397:entails a fragmentary life, and, apparently at the stormy epoch of June
tests/les_miserables.txt:19399:which we have spoken, beating about the country, selling to some,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19401:children, in a rickety cart, in the rear of troops on the march, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:19402:an instinct for always attaching himself to the victorious army. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:19403:campaign ended, and having, as he said, “some quibus,” he had come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19406:This _quibus_, composed of purses and watches, of gold rings and silver
tests/les_miserables.txt:19407:crosses, gathered in harvest-time in furrows sown with corpses, did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:19408:amount to a large total, and did not carry this sutler turned
tests/les_miserables.txt:19411:Thénardier had that peculiar rectilinear something about his gestures
tests/les_miserables.txt:19412:which, accompanied by an oath, recalls the barracks, and by a sign of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19413:the cross, the seminary. He was a fine talker. He allowed it to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:19414:thought that he was an educated man. Nevertheless, the schoolmaster had
tests/les_miserables.txt:19415:noticed that he pronounced improperly.12
tests/les_miserables.txt:19417:He composed the travellers’ tariff card in a superior manner, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:19418:practised eyes sometimes spied out orthographical errors in it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19419:Thénardier was cunning, greedy, slothful, and clever. He did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:19420:disdain his servants, which caused his wife to dispense with them. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:19422:man must be an object coveted by all.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19424:Thénardier, who was, above all, an astute and well-balanced man, was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19425:scamp of a temperate sort. This is the worst species; hypocrisy enters
tests/les_miserables.txt:19428:It is not that Thénardier was not, on occasion, capable of wrath to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19429:quite the same degree as his wife; but this was very rare, and at such
tests/les_miserables.txt:19430:times, since he was enraged with the human race in general, as he bore
tests/les_miserables.txt:19431:within him a deep furnace of hatred. And since he was one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:19432:people who are continually avenging their wrongs, who accuse everything
tests/les_miserables.txt:19433:that passes before them of everything which has befallen them, and who
tests/les_miserables.txt:19434:are always ready to cast upon the first person who comes to hand, as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19435:legitimate grievance, the sum total of the deceptions, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19436:bankruptcies, and the calamities of their lives,—when all this leaven
tests/les_miserables.txt:19438:terrible. Woe to the person who came under his wrath at such a time!
tests/les_miserables.txt:19441:penetrating, silent or talkative, according to circumstances, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19443:are accustomed to screw up their eyes to gaze through marine glasses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19446:Every newcomer who entered the tavern said, on catching sight of Madame
tests/les_miserables.txt:19449:worked; he created. He directed everything by a sort of invisible and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19450:constant magnetic action. A word was sufficient for him, sometimes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19451:sign; the mastodon obeyed. Thénardier was a sort of special and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19455:Thénardier,”—which was an inadmissible hypothesis, by the way,—she
tests/les_miserables.txt:19456:would not have blamed her husband in public on any subject whatever.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19457:She would never have committed “before strangers” that mistake so often
tests/les_miserables.txt:19458:committed by women, and which is called in parliamentary language,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19459:“exposing the crown.” Although their concord had only evil as its
tests/les_miserables.txt:19460:result, there was contemplation in Madame Thénardier’s submission to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19464:matter; for certain ugly features have a cause in the very depths of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19465:eternal beauty. There was an unknown quantity about Thénardier; hence
tests/les_miserables.txt:19466:the absolute empire of the man over that woman. At certain moments she
tests/les_miserables.txt:19467:beheld him like a lighted candle; at others she felt him like a claw.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19469:This woman was a formidable creature who loved no one except her
tests/les_miserables.txt:19470:children, and who did not fear any one except her husband. She was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19471:mother because she was mammiferous. But her maternity stopped short
tests/les_miserables.txt:19473:man had but one thought,—how to enrich himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19475:He did not succeed in this. A theatre worthy of this great talent was
tests/les_miserables.txt:19476:lacking. Thénardier was ruining himself at Montfermeil, if ruin is
tests/les_miserables.txt:19478:scamp would have become a millionaire; but an inn-keeper must browse
tests/les_miserables.txt:19479:where fate has hitched him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19482:restricted sense, and does not extend to an entire class.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19485:hundred francs’ worth of petty debts, and this rendered him anxious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19487:Whatever may have been the obstinate injustice of destiny in this case,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19489:profundity and in the most modern fashion, that thing which is a virtue
tests/les_miserables.txt:19490:among barbarous peoples and an object of merchandise among civilized
tests/les_miserables.txt:19491:peoples,—hospitality. Besides, he was an admirable poacher, and quoted
tests/les_miserables.txt:19492:for his skill in shooting. He had a certain cold and tranquil laugh,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19493:which was particularly dangerous.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19496:He had professional aphorisms, which he inserted into his wife’s mind.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19498:a low voice, “is to sell to the first comer, stews, repose, light,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19499:fire, dirty sheets, a servant, lice, and a smile; to stop passers-by,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19501:travelling families respectfully: to shave the man, to pluck the woman,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19502:to pick the child clean; to quote the window open, the window shut, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19503:chimney-corner, the armchair, the chair, the ottoman, the stool, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19504:feather-bed, the mattress and the truss of straw; to know how much the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19505:shadow uses up the mirror, and to put a price on it; and, by five
tests/les_miserables.txt:19507:for the flies which his dog eats!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:19513:While the husband pondered and combined, Madame Thénardier thought not
tests/les_miserables.txt:19514:of absent creditors, took no heed of yesterday nor of to-morrow, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19517:Such were these two beings. Cosette was between them, subjected to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19518:their double pressure, like a creature who is at the same time being
tests/les_miserables.txt:19519:ground up in a mill and pulled to pieces with pincers. The man and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19520:woman each had a different method: Cosette was overwhelmed with
tests/les_miserables.txt:19525:fluttered about, panted, moved heavy articles, and weak as she was, did
tests/les_miserables.txt:19526:the coarse work. There was no mercy for her; a fierce mistress and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19528:which Cosette had been caught, and where she lay trembling. The ideal
tests/les_miserables.txt:19532:The poor child passively held her peace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19534:What takes place within these souls when they have but just quitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:19547:old, she had already suffered so much that she reflected with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19548:lugubrious air of an old woman. Her eye was black in consequence of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19549:blow from Madame Thénardier’s fist, which caused the latter to remark
tests/les_miserables.txt:19553:Cosette was thinking that it was dark, very dark, that the pitchers and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19554:caraffes in the chambers of the travellers who had arrived must have
tests/les_miserables.txt:19555:been filled and that there was no more water in the cistern.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19557:She was somewhat reassured because no one in the Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:19558:establishment drank much water. Thirsty people were never lacking
tests/les_miserables.txt:19559:there; but their thirst was of the sort which applies to the jug rather
tests/les_miserables.txt:19560:than to the pitcher. Any one who had asked for a glass of water among
tests/les_miserables.txt:19562:men. But there came a moment when the child trembled; Madame Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:19563:raised the cover of a stew-pan which was boiling on the stove, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:19564:seized a glass and briskly approached the cistern. She turned the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19565:faucet; the child had raised her head and was following all the woman’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:19566:movements. A thin stream of water trickled from the faucet, and half
tests/les_miserables.txt:19568:momentary silence ensued. The child did not breathe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19574:Cosette applied herself to her work once more, but for a quarter of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:19577:She counted the minutes that passed in this manner, and wished it were
tests/les_miserables.txt:19581:exclaimed, “It’s as black as an oven!” or, “One must needs be a cat to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19585:All at once one of the pedlers who lodged in the hostelry entered, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19586:said in a harsh voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:19598:bucket, a whole bucketful, and it was I who took the water to him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19605:exclaimed the pedler. “I tell you that he has not been watered, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:19606:little jade! He has a way of blowing when he has had no water, which I
tests/les_miserables.txt:19610:Cosette persisted, and added in a voice rendered hoarse with anguish,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19611:and which was hardly audible:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:19620:Cosette crept under the table again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19626:Then glancing about her:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:19631:She bent down and discovered Cosette cowering at the other end of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19634:“Are you coming?” shrieked Madame Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19636:Cosette crawled out of the sort of hole in which she had hidden
tests/les_miserables.txt:19639:“Mademoiselle Dog-lack-name, go and water that horse.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:19650:Cosette dropped her head, and went for an empty bucket which stood near
tests/les_miserables.txt:19651:the chimney-corner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19653:This bucket was bigger than she was, and the child could have set down
tests/les_miserables.txt:19659:“There’s plenty in the spring. There never was such a malicious
tests/les_miserables.txt:19660:creature as that. I think I should have done better to strain my
tests/les_miserables.txt:19664:Then she rummaged in a drawer which contained sous, pepper, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19667:“See here, Mam’selle Toad,” she added, “on your way back, you will get
tests/les_miserables.txt:19668:a big loaf from the baker. Here’s a fifteen-sou piece.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:19671:Cosette had a little pocket on one side of her apron; she took the coin
tests/les_miserables.txt:19672:without saying a word, and put it in that pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19674:Then she stood motionless, bucket in hand, the open door before her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19675:She seemed to be waiting for some one to come to her rescue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19677:“Get along with you!” screamed the Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19679:Cosette went out. The door closed behind her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19687:The line of open-air booths starting at the church, extended, as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19689:booths were all illuminated, because the citizens would soon pass on
tests/les_miserables.txt:19690:their way to the midnight mass, with candles burning in paper funnels,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19691:which, as the schoolmaster, then seated at the table at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19692:Thénardiers’ observed, produced “a magical effect.” In compensation,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19695:The last of these stalls, established precisely opposite the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19697:and magnificent objects of tin. In the first row, and far forwards, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19698:merchant had placed on a background of white napkins, an immense doll,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19699:nearly two feet high, who was dressed in a robe of pink crepe, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:19700:gold wheat-ears on her head, which had real hair and enamel eyes. All
tests/les_miserables.txt:19703:Montfermeil sufficiently rich or sufficiently extravagant to give it to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19704:her child. Éponine and Azelma had passed hours in contemplating it, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19705:Cosette herself had ventured to cast a glance at it, on the sly, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:19708:At the moment when Cosette emerged, bucket in hand, melancholy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19709:overcome as she was, she could not refrain from lifting her eyes to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19710:that wonderful doll, towards _the lady_, as she called it. The poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:19711:child paused in amazement. She had not yet beheld that doll close to.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19712:The whole shop seemed a palace to her: the doll was not a doll; it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:19713:a vision. It was joy, splendor, riches, happiness, which appeared in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19714:sort of chimerical halo to that unhappy little being so profoundly
tests/les_miserables.txt:19715:engulfed in gloomy and chilly misery. With the sad and innocent
tests/les_miserables.txt:19716:sagacity of childhood, Cosette measured the abyss which separated her
tests/les_miserables.txt:19718:least a princess, to have a “thing” like that. She gazed at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:19720:happy that doll must be!” She could not take her eyes from that
tests/les_miserables.txt:19721:fantastic stall. The more she looked, the more dazzled she grew. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:19723:large one, which seemed to her to be fairies and genii. The merchant,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19724:who was pacing back and forth in front of his shop, produced on her
tests/les_miserables.txt:19725:somewhat the effect of being the Eternal Father.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19727:In this adoration she forgot everything, even the errand with which she
tests/les_miserables.txt:19728:was charged.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19730:All at once the Thénardier’s coarse voice recalled her to reality:
tests/les_miserables.txt:19735:The Thénardier had cast a glance into the street, and had caught sight
tests/les_miserables.txt:19736:of Cosette in her ecstasy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19739:which she was capable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19747:As the Thénardier hostelry was in that part of the village which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:19748:near the church, it was to the spring in the forest in the direction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19751:She did not glance at the display of a single other merchant. So long
tests/les_miserables.txt:19752:as she was in Boulanger Lane and in the neighborhood of the church, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19754:last stall vanished. The poor child found herself in the dark. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:19755:plunged into it. Only, as a certain emotion overcame her, she made as
tests/les_miserables.txt:19756:much motion as possible with the handle of the bucket as she walked
tests/les_miserables.txt:19757:along. This made a noise which afforded her company.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19759:The further she went, the denser the darkness became. There was no one
tests/les_miserables.txt:19760:in the streets. However, she did encounter a woman, who turned around
tests/les_miserables.txt:19761:on seeing her, and stood still, muttering between her teeth: “Where can
tests/les_miserables.txt:19762:that child be going? Is it a werewolf child?” Then the woman recognized
tests/les_miserables.txt:19767:streets which terminate in the village of Montfermeil on the side of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19769:sides of her path, she proceeded with tolerable boldness. From time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19770:time she caught the flicker of a candle through the crack of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19772:reassured her. But in proportion as she advanced, her pace slackened
tests/les_miserables.txt:19773:mechanically, as it were. When she had passed the corner of the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:19774:house, Cosette paused. It had been hard to advance further than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19775:last stall; it became impossible to proceed further than the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:19776:house. She set her bucket on the ground, thrust her hand into her hair,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19777:and began slowly to scratch her head,—a gesture peculiar to children
tests/les_miserables.txt:19778:when terrified and undecided what to do. It was no longer Montfermeil;
tests/les_miserables.txt:19779:it was the open fields. Black and desert space was before her. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:19781:where there were beasts, where there were spectres, possibly. She took
tests/les_miserables.txt:19783:distinctly saw spectres moving in the trees. Then she seized her bucket
tests/les_miserables.txt:19784:again; fear had lent her audacity. “Bah!” said she; “I will tell him
tests/les_miserables.txt:19788:Hardly had she gone a hundred paces when she paused and began to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19789:scratch her head again. Now it was the Thénardier who appeared to her,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19791:child cast a melancholy glance before her and behind her. What was she
tests/les_miserables.txt:19792:to do? What was to become of her? Where was she to go? In front of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:19793:was the spectre of the Thénardier; behind her all the phantoms of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19795:recoiled. She resumed her path to the spring, and began to run. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:19797:looking at or listening to anything. She only paused in her course when
tests/les_miserables.txt:19798:her breath failed her; but she did not halt in her advance. She went
tests/les_miserables.txt:19801:As she ran she felt like crying.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19803:The nocturnal quivering of the forest surrounded her completely.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19806:facing this tiny creature. On the one hand, all shadow; on the other,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19812:instinct guided her vaguely. But she did not turn her eyes either to
tests/les_miserables.txt:19813:right or to left, for fear of seeing things in the branches and in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19814:brushwood. In this manner she reached the spring.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19816:It was a narrow, natural basin, hollowed out by the water in a clayey
tests/les_miserables.txt:19818:crimped grasses which are called Henry IV.’s frills, and paved with
tests/les_miserables.txt:19823:the habit of coming to this spring. She felt with her left hand in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19824:dark for a young oak which leaned over the spring, and which usually
tests/les_miserables.txt:19825:served to support her, found one of its branches, clung to it, bent
tests/les_miserables.txt:19826:down, and plunged the bucket in the water. She was in a state of such
tests/les_miserables.txt:19827:violent excitement that her strength was trebled. While thus bent over,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19828:she did not notice that the pocket of her apron had emptied itself into
tests/les_miserables.txt:19829:the spring. The fifteen-sou piece fell into the water. Cosette neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:19830:saw nor heard it fall. She drew out the bucket nearly full, and set it
tests/les_miserables.txt:19833:That done, she perceived that she was worn out with fatigue. She would
tests/les_miserables.txt:19834:have liked to set out again at once, but the effort required to fill
tests/les_miserables.txt:19835:the bucket had been such that she found it impossible to take a step.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19836:She was forced to sit down. She dropped on the grass, and remained
tests/les_miserables.txt:19837:crouching there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19840:because she could not do otherwise. The agitated water in the bucket
tests/les_miserables.txt:19841:beside her was describing circles which resembled tin serpents.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19843:Overhead the sky was covered with vast black clouds, which were like
tests/les_miserables.txt:19844:masses of smoke. The tragic mask of shadow seemed to bend vaguely over
tests/les_miserables.txt:19845:the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19849:The child stared with bewildered eyes at this great star, with which
tests/les_miserables.txt:19850:she was unfamiliar, and which terrified her. The planet was, in fact,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19851:very near the horizon and was traversing a dense layer of mist which
tests/les_miserables.txt:19853:magnified the star. One would have called it a luminous wound.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19855:A cold wind was blowing from the plain. The forest was dark, not a leaf
tests/les_miserables.txt:19858:misshapen bushes whistled in the clearings. The tall grasses undulated
tests/les_miserables.txt:19860:furnished with claws in search of prey. Some bits of dry heather,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19862:terror before something which was coming after. On all sides there were
tests/les_miserables.txt:19863:lugubrious stretches.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19866:himself in the opposite of day feels his heart contract. When the eye
tests/les_miserables.txt:19867:sees black, the heart sees trouble. In an eclipse in the night, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19868:sooty opacity, there is anxiety even for the stoutest of hearts. No one
tests/les_miserables.txt:19870:trees—two formidable densities. A chimerical reality appears in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19871:indistinct depths. The inconceivable is outlined a few paces distant
tests/les_miserables.txt:19872:from you with a spectral clearness. One beholds floating, either in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19873:space or in one’s own brain, one knows not what vague and intangible
tests/les_miserables.txt:19874:thing, like the dreams of sleeping flowers. There are fierce attitudes
tests/les_miserables.txt:19875:on the horizon. One inhales the effluvia of the great black void. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:19876:is afraid to glance behind him, yet desirous of doing so. The cavities
tests/les_miserables.txt:19877:of night, things grown haggard, taciturn profiles which vanish when one
tests/les_miserables.txt:19878:advances, obscure dishevelments, irritated tufts, livid pools, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19879:lugubrious reflected in the funereal, the sepulchral immensity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19880:silence, unknown but possible beings, bendings of mysterious branches,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19882:all this one has no protection. There is no hardihood which does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:19883:shudder and which does not feel the vicinity of anguish. One is
tests/les_miserables.txt:19884:conscious of something hideous, as though one’s soul were becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:19886:indescribably sinister in the case of a child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19888:Forests are apocalypses, and the beating of the wings of a tiny soul
tests/les_miserables.txt:19889:produces a sound of agony beneath their monstrous vault.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19891:Without understanding her sensations, Cosette was conscious that she
tests/les_miserables.txt:19892:was seized upon by that black enormity of nature; it was no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:19893:terror alone which was gaining possession of her; it was something more
tests/les_miserables.txt:19895:the strangeness of that shiver which chilled her to the very bottom of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19899:Then, by a sort of instinct, she began to count aloud, one, two, three,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19900:four, and so on up to ten, in order to escape from that singular state
tests/les_miserables.txt:19901:which she did not understand, but which terrified her, and, when she
tests/les_miserables.txt:19902:had finished, she began again; this restored her to a true perception
tests/les_miserables.txt:19903:of the things about her. Her hands, which she had wet in drawing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19904:water, felt cold; she rose; her terror, a natural and unconquerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:19906:speed through the forest, across the fields to the houses, to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19907:windows, to the lighted candles. Her glance fell upon the water which
tests/les_miserables.txt:19908:stood before her; such was the fright which the Thénardier inspired in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19909:her, that she dared not flee without that bucket of water: she seized
tests/les_miserables.txt:19910:the handle with both hands; she could hardly lift the pail.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19912:In this manner she advanced a dozen paces, but the bucket was full; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:19913:was heavy; she was forced to set it on the ground once more. She took
tests/les_miserables.txt:19914:breath for an instant, then lifted the handle of the bucket again, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19915:resumed her march, proceeding a little further this time, but again she
tests/les_miserables.txt:19916:was obliged to pause. After some seconds of repose she set out again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19918:weight of the bucket strained and stiffened her thin arms. The iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:19919:handle completed the benumbing and freezing of her wet and tiny hands;
tests/les_miserables.txt:19920:she was forced to halt from time to time, and each time that she did
tests/les_miserables.txt:19921:so, the cold water which splashed from the pail fell on her bare legs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19922:This took place in the depths of a forest, at night, in winter, far
tests/les_miserables.txt:19923:from all human sight; she was a child of eight: no one but God saw that
tests/les_miserables.txt:19931:She panted with a sort of painful rattle; sobs contracted her throat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:19933:distance: it was her custom to imagine the Thénardier always present.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19935:However, she could not make much headway in that manner, and she went
tests/les_miserables.txt:19937:walking as long as possible between them, she reflected with anguish
tests/les_miserables.txt:19942:arriving near an old chestnut-tree with which she was acquainted, made
tests/les_miserables.txt:19944:rested; then she summoned up all her strength, picked up her bucket
tests/les_miserables.txt:19945:again, and courageously resumed her march, but the poor little
tests/les_miserables.txt:19946:desperate creature could not refrain from crying, “O my God! my God!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:19949:At that moment she suddenly became conscious that her bucket no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:19950:weighed anything at all: a hand, which seemed to her enormous, had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:19952:large black form, straight and erect, was walking beside her through
tests/les_miserables.txt:19953:the darkness; it was a man who had come up behind her, and whose
tests/les_miserables.txt:19954:approach she had not heard. This man, without uttering a word, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:19955:seized the handle of the bucket which she was carrying.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19957:There are instincts for all the encounters of life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19959:The child was not afraid.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19970:lodgings, and he seemed to halt, by preference, at the most modest
tests/les_miserables.txt:19971:houses on that dilapidated border of the faubourg Saint-Marceau.
tests/les_miserables.txt:19973:We shall see further on that this man had, in fact, hired a chamber in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19977:what may be called the well-bred mendicant,—extreme wretchedness
tests/les_miserables.txt:19978:combined with extreme cleanliness. This is a very rare mixture which
tests/les_miserables.txt:19979:inspires intelligent hearts with that double respect which one feels
tests/les_miserables.txt:19981:wore a very old and very well brushed round hat; a coarse coat, worn
tests/les_miserables.txt:19982:perfectly threadbare, of an ochre yellow, a color that was not in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19983:least eccentric at that epoch; a large waistcoat with pockets of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19984:venerable cut; black breeches, worn gray at the knee, stockings of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19985:black worsted; and thick shoes with copper buckles. He would have been
tests/les_miserables.txt:19986:pronounced a preceptor in some good family, returned from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:19988:from his perfectly white hair, his wrinkled brow, his livid lips, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:19989:his countenance, where everything breathed depression and weariness of
tests/les_miserables.txt:19990:life. Judging from his firm tread, from the singular vigor which
tests/les_miserables.txt:19992:wrinkles on his brow were well placed, and would have disposed in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:19993:favor any one who observed him attentively. His lip contracted with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19994:strange fold which seemed severe, and which was humble. There was in
tests/les_miserables.txt:19995:the depth of his glance an indescribable melancholy serenity. In his
tests/les_miserables.txt:19996:left hand he carried a little bundle tied up in a handkerchief; in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:19997:right he leaned on a sort of a cudgel, cut from some hedge. This stick
tests/les_miserables.txt:19998:had been carefully trimmed, and had an air that was not too
tests/les_miserables.txt:19999:threatening; the most had been made of its knots, and it had received a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20000:coral-like head, made from red wax: it was a cudgel, and it seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:20001:be a cane.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20003:There are but few passers-by on that boulevard, particularly in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20005:without any affectation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20007:At that epoch, King Louis XVIII. went nearly every day to
tests/les_miserables.txt:20008:Choisy-le-Roi: it was one of his favorite excursions. Towards two
tests/les_miserables.txt:20009:o’clock, almost invariably, the royal carriage and cavalcade was seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:20012:This served in lieu of a watch or clock to the poor women of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20013:quarter who said, “It is two o’clock; there he is returning to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20018:always creates a tumult; besides, the appearance and disappearance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:20019:Louis XVIII. produced a certain effect in the streets of Paris. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:20020:rapid but majestic. This impotent king had a taste for a fast gallop;
tests/les_miserables.txt:20021:as he was not able to walk, he wished to run: that cripple would gladly
tests/les_miserables.txt:20022:have had himself drawn by the lightning. He passed, pacific and severe,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20023:in the midst of naked swords. His massive couch, all covered with
tests/les_miserables.txt:20024:gilding, with great branches of lilies painted on the panels, thundered
tests/les_miserables.txt:20025:noisily along. There was hardly time to cast a glance upon it. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20026:rear angle on the right there was visible on tufted cushions of white
tests/les_miserables.txt:20027:satin a large, firm, and ruddy face, a brow freshly powdered _à
tests/les_miserables.txt:20028:l’oiseau royal_, a proud, hard, crafty eye, the smile of an educated
tests/les_miserables.txt:20030:coat, the Golden Fleece, the cross of Saint Louis, the cross of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20033:hat decked with white ostrich plumes on his knees enwrapped in high
tests/les_miserables.txt:20034:English gaiters; when he re-entered the city, he put on his hat and
tests/les_miserables.txt:20035:saluted rarely; he stared coldly at the people, and they returned it in
tests/les_miserables.txt:20036:kind. When he appeared for the first time in the Saint-Marceau quarter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20037:the whole success which he produced is contained in this remark of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:20038:inhabitant of the faubourg to his comrade, “That big fellow yonder is
tests/les_miserables.txt:20045:The promenader in the yellow coat evidently did not belong in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20047:to this detail. When, at two o’clock, the royal carriage, surrounded by
tests/les_miserables.txt:20048:a squadron of the body-guard all covered with silver lace, debouched on
tests/les_miserables.txt:20051:this cross-lane. He drew up hastily behind the corner of the wall of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:20052:enclosure, though this did not prevent M. le Duc de Havré from spying
tests/les_miserables.txt:20055:M. le Duc de Havré, as captain of the guard on duty that day, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:20056:seated in the carriage, opposite the king. He said to his Majesty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20057:“Yonder is an evil-looking man.” Members of the police, who were
tests/les_miserables.txt:20058:clearing the king’s route, took equal note of him: one of them received
tests/les_miserables.txt:20061:agent lost trace of him, as is stated in a report addressed that same
tests/les_miserables.txt:20062:evening to M. le Comte d’Anglès, Minister of State, Prefect of Police.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20064:When the man in the yellow coat had thrown the agent off his track, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:20065:redoubled his pace, not without turning round many a time to assure
tests/les_miserables.txt:20067:to say, when night was fully come, he passed in front of the theatre of
tests/les_miserables.txt:20068:the Porte Saint-Martin, where _The Two Convicts_ was being played that
tests/les_miserables.txt:20069:day. This poster, illuminated by the theatre lanterns, struck him; for,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20071:he was in the blind alley of La Planchette, and he entered the _Plat
tests/les_miserables.txt:20072:d’Etain_ [the Pewter Platter], where the office of the coach for Lagny
tests/les_miserables.txt:20073:was then situated. This coach set out at half-past four. The horses
tests/les_miserables.txt:20074:were harnessed, and the travellers, summoned by the coachman, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:20075:hastily climbing the lofty iron ladder of the vehicle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20079:“Have you a place?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20082:“Only one—beside me on the box,” said the coachman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20090:Nevertheless, before setting out, the coachman cast a glance at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20094:“Are you going as far as Lagny?” demanded the coachman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20100:They started. When they had passed the barrier, the coachman tried to
tests/les_miserables.txt:20101:enter into conversation, but the traveller only replied in
tests/les_miserables.txt:20102:monosyllables. The coachman took to whistling and swearing at his
tests/les_miserables.txt:20105:The coachman wrapped himself up in his cloak. It was cold. The man did
tests/les_miserables.txt:20109:Towards six o’clock in the evening they reached Chelles. The coachman
tests/les_miserables.txt:20110:drew up in front of the carters’ inn installed in the ancient buildings
tests/les_miserables.txt:20115:He took his bundle and his cudgel and jumped down from the vehicle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20121:When the coach set out for Lagny a few minutes later, it did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:20122:encounter him in the principal street of Chelles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20124:The coachman turned to the inside travellers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20127:him. He had not the air of owning a sou, but he does not consider
tests/les_miserables.txt:20134:strides through the dark, down the principal street of Chelles, then he
tests/les_miserables.txt:20135:had turned to the right before reaching the church, into the crossroad
tests/les_miserables.txt:20136:leading to Montfermeil, like a person who was acquainted with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20137:country and had been there before.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20139:He followed this road rapidly. At the spot where it is intersected by
tests/les_miserables.txt:20140:the ancient tree-bordered road which runs from Gagny to Lagny, he heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:20141:people coming. He concealed himself precipitately in a ditch, and there
tests/les_miserables.txt:20142:waited until the passers-by were at a distance. The precaution was
tests/les_miserables.txt:20144:very dark December night. Not more than two or three stars were visible
tests/les_miserables.txt:20147:It is at this point that the ascent of the hill begins. The man did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:20148:return to the road to Montfermeil; he struck across the fields to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20151:Once in the forest he slackened his pace, and began a careful
tests/les_miserables.txt:20152:examination of all the trees, advancing, step by step, as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:20154:came a moment when he appeared to lose himself, and he paused in
tests/les_miserables.txt:20155:indecision. At last he arrived, by dint of feeling his way inch by
tests/les_miserables.txt:20156:inch, at a clearing where there was a great heap of whitish stones. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:20159:large tree, covered with those excrescences which are the warts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:20160:vegetation, stood a few paces distant from the pile of stones. He went
tests/les_miserables.txt:20162:though seeking to recognize and count all the warts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20164:Opposite this tree, which was an ash, there was a chestnut-tree,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20165:suffering from a peeling of the bark, to which a band of zinc had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:20166:nailed by way of dressing. He raised himself on tiptoe and touched this
tests/les_miserables.txt:20167:band of zinc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20169:Then he trod about for awhile on the ground comprised in the space
tests/les_miserables.txt:20171:assure himself that the soil has not recently been disturbed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20173:That done, he took his bearings, and resumed his march through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20178:As he walked through the thicket in the direction of Montfermeil, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:20181:perceived that it was a very young child, laden with an enormous bucket
tests/les_miserables.txt:20182:of water. Then he approached the child, and silently grasped the handle
tests/les_miserables.txt:20183:of the bucket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20193:The man accosted her. He spoke in a voice that was grave and almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:20196:“My child, what you are carrying is very heavy for you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20204:“Give it to me,” said the man; “I will carry it for you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20207:Cosette let go of the bucket-handle. The man walked along beside her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20218:“And have you come from far like this?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20235:“I don’t know,” answered the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20242:And after a silence she went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20247:The man halted; he set the bucket on the ground, bent down and placed
tests/les_miserables.txt:20248:both hands on the child’s shoulders, making an effort to look at her
tests/les_miserables.txt:20249:and to see her face in the dark.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20251:Cosette’s thin and sickly face was vaguely outlined by the livid light
tests/les_miserables.txt:20259:The man seemed to have received an electric shock. He looked at her
tests/les_miserables.txt:20260:once more; then he removed his hands from Cosette’s shoulders, seized
tests/les_miserables.txt:20261:the bucket, and set out again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20279:“Who sent you at such an hour to get water in the forest?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20285:The man resumed, in a voice which he strove to render indifferent, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:20286:in which there was, nevertheless, a singular tremor:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20291:“She is my mistress,” said the child. “She keeps the inn.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20298:“We are on the way there,” said the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20300:The man walked tolerably fast. Cosette followed him without difficulty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20302:towards the man, with a sort of tranquillity and an indescribable
tests/les_miserables.txt:20303:confidence. She had never been taught to turn to Providence and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:20304:pray; nevertheless, she felt within her something which resembled hope
tests/les_miserables.txt:20305:and joy, and which mounted towards heaven.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20321:Another pause ensued. Cosette lifted up her voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20332:This was the way the child simplified the romantic names so dear to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20345:“Oh!” said the child, “they have beautiful dolls; things with gold in
tests/les_miserables.txt:20364:The child raised her great eyes, in which hung a tear, which was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:20365:visible because of the darkness, and replied gently:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20370:After an interval of silence she went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20379:“In the best way I can. They let me alone; but I have not many
tests/les_miserables.txt:20384:The child held up her tiny finger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20386:“And it will not cut?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20389:“Yes, sir,” said the child; “it cuts salad and the heads of flies.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20392:They reached the village. Cosette guided the stranger through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20394:bread which she had been ordered to fetch. The man had ceased to ply
tests/les_miserables.txt:20395:her with questions, and now preserved a gloomy silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20397:When they had left the church behind them, the man, on perceiving all
tests/les_miserables.txt:20406:As they approached the tavern, Cosette timidly touched his arm:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20411:“What, my child?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20420:“Will you let me take my bucket now?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20426:“If Madame sees that some one has carried it for me, she will beat me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20429:The man handed her the bucket. An instant later they were at the tavern
tests/les_miserables.txt:20439:Cosette could not refrain from casting a sidelong glance at the big
tests/les_miserables.txt:20440:doll, which was still displayed at the toy-merchant’s; then she
tests/les_miserables.txt:20441:knocked. The door opened. The Thénardier appeared with a candle in her
tests/les_miserables.txt:20444:“Ah! so it’s you, you little wretch! good mercy, but you’ve taken your
tests/les_miserables.txt:20452:The Thénardier speedily replaced her gruff air by her amiable grimace,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20453:a change of aspect common to tavern-keepers, and eagerly sought the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20454:newcomer with her eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20460:Wealthy travellers are not so polite. This gesture, and an inspection
tests/les_miserables.txt:20461:of the stranger’s costume and baggage, which the Thénardier passed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:20462:review with one glance, caused the amiable grimace to vanish, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20468:The “good man” entered. The Thénardier cast a second glance at him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20469:paid particular attention to his frock-coat, which was absolutely
tests/les_miserables.txt:20470:threadbare, and to his hat, which was a little battered, and, tossing
tests/les_miserables.txt:20471:her head, wrinkling her nose, and screwing up her eyes, she consulted
tests/les_miserables.txt:20472:her husband, who was still drinking with the carters. The husband
tests/les_miserables.txt:20473:replied by that imperceptible movement of the forefinger, which, backed
tests/les_miserables.txt:20474:up by an inflation of the lips, signifies in such cases: A regular
tests/les_miserables.txt:20475:beggar. Thereupon, the Thénardier exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20480:“Put me where you like,” said the man; “in the attic, in the stable. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:20481:will pay as though I occupied a room.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20493:“Forty sous!” said a carter, in a low tone, to the Thénardier woman;
tests/les_miserables.txt:20494:“why, the charge is only twenty sous!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20497:“It is forty in his case,” retorted the Thénardier, in the same tone.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20502:such people in it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20505:In the meantime, the man, laying his bundle and his cudgel on a bench,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20506:had seated himself at a table, on which Cosette made haste to place a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20507:bottle of wine and a glass. The merchant who had demanded the bucket of
tests/les_miserables.txt:20508:water took it to his horse himself. Cosette resumed her place under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20509:kitchen table, and her knitting.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20511:The man, who had barely moistened his lips in the wine which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:20512:poured out for himself, observed the child with peculiar attention.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20515:have already given a sketch of that sombre little figure. Cosette was
tests/les_miserables.txt:20518:out with weeping. The corners of her mouth had that curve of habitual
tests/les_miserables.txt:20519:anguish which is seen in condemned persons and desperately sick people.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20520:Her hands were, as her mother had divined, “ruined with chilblains.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20521:The fire which illuminated her at that moment brought into relief all
tests/les_miserables.txt:20523:apparent. As she was always shivering, she had acquired the habit of
tests/les_miserables.txt:20524:pressing her knees one against the other. Her entire clothing was but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20525:rag which would have inspired pity in summer, and which inspired horror
tests/les_miserables.txt:20526:in winter. All she had on was hole-ridden linen, not a scrap of
tests/les_miserables.txt:20527:woollen. Her skin was visible here and there and everywhere black and
tests/les_miserables.txt:20528:blue spots could be descried, which marked the places where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20529:Thénardier woman had touched her. Her naked legs were thin and red. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:20530:hollows in her neck were enough to make one weep. This child’s whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:20531:person, her mien, her attitude, the sound of her voice, the intervals
tests/les_miserables.txt:20532:which she allowed to elapse between one word and the next, her glance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20533:her silence, her slightest gesture, expressed and betrayed one sole
tests/les_miserables.txt:20536:Fear was diffused all over her; she was covered with it, so to speak;
tests/les_miserables.txt:20537:fear drew her elbows close to her hips, withdrew her heels under her
tests/les_miserables.txt:20538:petticoat, made her occupy as little space as possible, allowed her
tests/les_miserables.txt:20539:only the breath that was absolutely necessary, and had become what
tests/les_miserables.txt:20540:might be called the habit of her body, admitting of no possible
tests/les_miserables.txt:20541:variation except an increase. In the depths of her eyes there was an
tests/les_miserables.txt:20544:Her fear was such, that on her arrival, wet as she was, Cosette did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:20545:dare to approach the fire and dry herself, but sat silently down to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:20548:The expression in the glance of that child of eight years was
tests/les_miserables.txt:20549:habitually so gloomy, and at times so tragic, that it seemed at certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:20550:moments as though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20554:never set foot in a church. “Have I the time?” said the Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20556:The man in the yellow coat never took his eyes from Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20558:All at once, the Thénardier exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20563:Cosette, according to her custom whenever the Thénardier uplifted her
tests/les_miserables.txt:20564:voice, emerged with great haste from beneath the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20566:She had completely forgotten the bread. She had recourse to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20567:expedient of children who live in a constant state of fear. She lied.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20572:“You should have knocked.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20575:“I did knock, Madame.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20585:“and if you are telling me a lie, I’ll lead you a pretty dance. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20586:meantime, give me back my fifteen-sou piece.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20589:Cosette plunged her hand into the pocket of her apron, and turned
tests/les_miserables.txt:20590:green. The fifteen-sou piece was not there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20592:“Ah, come now,” said Madame Thénardier, “did you hear me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20595:Cosette turned her pocket inside out; there was nothing in it. What
tests/les_miserables.txt:20596:could have become of that money? The unhappy little creature could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:20599:“Have you lost that fifteen-sou piece?” screamed the Thénardier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20603:At the same time, she stretched out her arm towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20604:cat-o’-nine-tails which hung on a nail in the chimney-corner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20606:This formidable gesture restored to Cosette sufficient strength to
tests/les_miserables.txt:20609:“Mercy, Madame, Madame! I will not do so any more!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20614:In the meantime, the man in the yellow coat had been fumbling in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20615:fob of his waistcoat, without any one having noticed his movements.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20616:Besides, the other travellers were drinking or playing cards, and were
tests/les_miserables.txt:20619:Cosette contracted herself into a ball, with anguish, within the angle
tests/les_miserables.txt:20620:of the chimney, endeavoring to gather up and conceal her poor half-nude
tests/les_miserables.txt:20623:“Pardon me, Madame,” said the man, “but just now I caught sight of
tests/les_miserables.txt:20624:something which had fallen from this little one’s apron pocket, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:20628:At the same time he bent down and seemed to be searching on the floor
tests/les_miserables.txt:20631:“Exactly; here it is,” he went on, straightening himself up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20633:And he held out a silver coin to the Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20637:It was not it, for it was a twenty-sou piece; but the Thénardier found
tests/les_miserables.txt:20638:it to her advantage. She put the coin in her pocket, and confined
tests/les_miserables.txt:20639:herself to casting a fierce glance at the child, accompanied with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20643:Cosette returned to what the Thénardier called “her kennel,” and her
tests/les_miserables.txt:20644:large eyes, which were riveted on the traveller, began to take on an
tests/les_miserables.txt:20645:expression such as they had never worn before. Thus far it was only an
tests/les_miserables.txt:20646:innocent amazement, but a sort of stupefied confidence was mingled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:20655:some frightfully poor wretch. He hasn’t a sou to pay for a supper. Will
tests/les_miserables.txt:20656:he even pay me for his lodging? It’s very lucky, all the same, that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:20657:did not occur to him to steal the money that was on the floor.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20663:in looks, and very charming; the one with shining chestnut tresses, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20664:other with long black braids hanging down her back, both vivacious,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20666:warmly clad, but with so much maternal art that the thickness of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20667:stuffs did not detract from the coquetry of arrangement. There was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20668:hint of winter, though the springtime was not wholly effaced. Light
tests/les_miserables.txt:20670:throne. In their toilettes, in their gayety, in the noise which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:20672:them in a grumbling tone which was full of adoration, “Ah! there you
tests/les_miserables.txt:20673:are, you children!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20678:gentle manner of shaking off which is peculiar to mothers, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:20679:exclaimed, “What frights they are!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20682:They went and seated themselves in the chimney-corner. They had a doll,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20683:which they turned over and over on their knees with all sorts of joyous
tests/les_miserables.txt:20684:chatter. From time to time Cosette raised her eyes from her knitting,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20685:and watched their play with a melancholy air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20688:to them. These three little girls did not yet reckon up four and twenty
tests/les_miserables.txt:20689:years between them, but they already represented the whole society of
tests/les_miserables.txt:20692:The doll of the Thénardier sisters was very much faded, very old, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:20693:much broken; but it seemed nonetheless admirable to Cosette, who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:20695:expression which all children will understand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20697:All at once, the Thénardier, who had been going back and forth in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20698:room, perceived that Cosette’s mind was distracted, and that, instead
tests/les_miserables.txt:20701:“Ah! I’ve caught you at it!” she cried. “So that’s the way you work!
tests/les_miserables.txt:20705:The stranger turned to the Thénardier, without quitting his chair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20710:Such a wish expressed by a traveller who had eaten a slice of mutton
tests/les_miserables.txt:20711:and had drunk a couple of bottles of wine with his supper, and who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:20713:order. But that a man with such a hat should permit himself such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20714:desire, and that a man with such a coat should permit himself to have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20715:will, was something which Madame Thénardier did not intend to tolerate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20716:She retorted with acrimony:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20718:“She must work, since she eats. I don’t feed her to do nothing.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20721:“What is she making?” went on the stranger, in a gentle voice which
tests/les_miserables.txt:20722:contrasted strangely with his beggarly garments and his porter’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:20727:“Stockings, if you please. Stockings for my little girls, who have
tests/les_miserables.txt:20731:The man looked at Cosette’s poor little red feet, and continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20733:“When will she have finished this pair of stockings?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20737:creature!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20740:“And how much will that pair of stockings be worth when she has
tests/les_miserables.txt:20744:The Thénardier cast a glance of disdain on him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20749:“Will you sell them for five francs?” went on the man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20751:“Good heavens!” exclaimed a carter who was listening, with a loud
tests/les_miserables.txt:20752:laugh; “five francs! the deuce, I should think so! five balls!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20757:“Yes, sir; if such is your fancy, you will be allowed to have that pair
tests/les_miserables.txt:20758:of stockings for five francs. We can refuse nothing to travellers.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20761:“You must pay on the spot,” said the Thénardier, in her curt and
tests/les_miserables.txt:20764:“I will buy that pair of stockings,” replied the man, “and,” he added,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20765:drawing a five-franc piece from his pocket, and laying it on the table,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20771:“Now I own your work; play, my child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20774:The carter was so much touched by the five-franc piece, that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:20777:“But it’s true!” he cried, examining it. “A real hind wheel! and not
tests/les_miserables.txt:20778:counterfeit!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20781:Thénardier approached and silently put the coin in his pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20783:The Thénardier had no reply to make. She bit her lips, and her face
tests/les_miserables.txt:20791:“Play!” said the Thénardier, in a terrible voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20800:“Who can this yellow man be?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20803:“I have seen millionaires with coats like that,” replied Thénardier, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:20807:always moved as little as possible. She picked up some old rags and her
tests/les_miserables.txt:20811:just executed a very important operation; they had just got hold of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20812:cat. They had thrown their doll on the ground, and Éponine, who was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20813:elder, was swathing the little cat, in spite of its mewing and its
tests/les_miserables.txt:20814:contortions, in a quantity of clothes and red and blue scraps. While
tests/les_miserables.txt:20815:performing this serious and difficult work she was saying to her sister
tests/les_miserables.txt:20816:in that sweet and adorable language of children, whose grace, like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20821:she cries, she is warm. See, sister, let us play with her. She shall be
tests/les_miserables.txt:20822:my little girl. I will be a lady. I will come to see you, and you shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:20823:look at her. Gradually, you will perceive her whiskers, and that will
tests/les_miserables.txt:20832:In the meantime, the drinkers had begun to sing an obscene song, and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:20833:laugh at it until the ceiling shook. Thénardier accompanied and
tests/les_miserables.txt:20834:encouraged them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20836:As birds make nests out of everything, so children make a doll out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:20837:anything which comes to hand. While Éponine and Azelma were bundling up
tests/les_miserables.txt:20838:the cat, Cosette, on her side, had dressed up her sword. That done, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:20842:of the most charming instincts of feminine childhood. To care for, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:20843:clothe, to deck, to dress, to undress, to redress, to teach, scold a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20844:little, to rock, to dandle, to lull to sleep, to imagine that something
tests/les_miserables.txt:20846:chattering, making tiny outfits, and baby clothes, while sewing little
tests/les_miserables.txt:20847:gowns, and corsages and bodices, the child grows into a young girl, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20848:young girl into a big girl, the big girl into a woman. The first child
tests/les_miserables.txt:20849:is the continuation of the last doll.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20852:impossible, as a woman without children.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20856:Madame Thénardier approached _the yellow man_; “My husband is right,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20857:she thought; “perhaps it is M. Laffitte; there are such queer rich
tests/les_miserables.txt:20861:She came and set her elbows on the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20868:repulsive to behold than her fierce mien, “I am willing that the child
tests/les_miserables.txt:20869:should play; I do not oppose it, but it is good for once, because you
tests/les_miserables.txt:20873:“Then this child is not yours?” demanded the man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20876:through charity; a sort of imbecile child. She must have water on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20877:brain; she has a large head, as you see. We do what we can for her, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:20878:we are not rich; we have written in vain to her native place, and have
tests/les_miserables.txt:20879:received no reply these six months. It must be that her mother is
tests/les_miserables.txt:20883:“Ah!” said the man, and fell into his reverie once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20885:“Her mother didn’t amount to much,” added the Thénardier; “she
tests/les_miserables.txt:20886:abandoned her child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20889:During the whole of this conversation Cosette, as though warned by some
tests/les_miserables.txt:20890:instinct that she was under discussion, had not taken her eyes from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20891:Thénardier’s face; she listened vaguely; she caught a few words here
tests/les_miserables.txt:20894:Meanwhile, the drinkers, all three-quarters intoxicated, were repeating
tests/les_miserables.txt:20895:their unclean refrain with redoubled gayety; it was a highly spiced and
tests/les_miserables.txt:20896:wanton song, in which the Virgin and the infant Jesus were introduced.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20898:Cosette, from her post under the table, gazed at the fire, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:20899:reflected from her fixed eyes. She had begun to rock the sort of baby
tests/les_miserables.txt:20900:which she had made, and, as she rocked it, she sang in a low voice, “My
tests/les_miserables.txt:20905:millionaire,” consented at last to take supper.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20910:“Bread and cheese,” said the man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20912:“Decidedly, he is a beggar” thought Madame Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20914:The drunken men were still singing their song, and the child under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20917:All at once, Cosette paused; she had just turned round and caught sight
tests/les_miserables.txt:20918:of the little Thénardiers’ doll, which they had abandoned for the cat
tests/les_miserables.txt:20919:and had left on the floor a few paces from the kitchen table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20921:Then she dropped the swaddled sword, which only half met her needs, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:20922:cast her eyes slowly round the room. Madame Thénardier was whispering
tests/les_miserables.txt:20923:to her husband and counting over some money; Ponine and Zelma were
tests/les_miserables.txt:20924:playing with the cat; the travellers were eating or drinking or
tests/les_miserables.txt:20925:singing; not a glance was fixed on her. She had not a moment to lose;
tests/les_miserables.txt:20926:she crept out from under the table on her hands and knees, made sure
tests/les_miserables.txt:20927:once more that no one was watching her; then she slipped quickly up to
tests/les_miserables.txt:20928:the doll and seized it. An instant later she was in her place again,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20929:seated motionless, and only turned so as to cast a shadow on the doll
tests/les_miserables.txt:20930:which she held in her arms. The happiness of playing with a doll was so
tests/les_miserables.txt:20931:rare for her that it contained all the violence of voluptuousness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20933:No one had seen her, except the traveller, who was slowly devouring his
tests/les_miserables.txt:20938:But with all the precautions that Cosette had taken she did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:20939:perceive that one of the doll’s legs stuck out and that the fire on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:20941:projecting from the shadow, suddenly struck the eye of Azelma, who said
tests/les_miserables.txt:20945:The two little girls paused in stupefaction; Cosette had dared to take
tests/les_miserables.txt:20948:Éponine rose, and, without releasing the cat, she ran to her mother,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20954:“Mother,” said the child, “look there!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:20959:Cosette, absorbed in the ecstasies of possession, no longer saw or
tests/les_miserables.txt:20962:Madame Thénardier’s countenance assumed that peculiar expression which
tests/les_miserables.txt:20963:is composed of the terrible mingled with the trifles of life, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:20964:has caused this style of woman to be named _Megaeras_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20966:On this occasion, wounded pride exasperated her wrath still further.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20968:the doll belonging to “these young ladies.” A czarina who should see a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20970:face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:20972:She shrieked in a voice rendered hoarse with indignation:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:20984:it, she clasped her hands, and, what is terrible to relate of a child
tests/les_miserables.txt:20986:neither the trip to the forest, nor the weight of the bucket of water,
tests/les_miserables.txt:20988:words which she had heard Madame Thénardier utter had been able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:20995:“Don’t you see?” said the Thénardier, pointing to the _corpus delicti_
tests/les_miserables.txt:20996:which lay at Cosette’s feet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21000:“That beggar,” replied the Thénardier, “has permitted herself to touch
tests/les_miserables.txt:21001:the children’s doll!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21008:“She touched it with her dirty hands!” pursued the Thénardier, “with
tests/les_miserables.txt:21014:“Will you stop your noise?” screamed the Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21018:As soon as he had gone, the Thénardier profited by his absence to give
tests/les_miserables.txt:21019:Cosette a hearty kick under the table, which made the child utter loud
tests/les_miserables.txt:21020:cries.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21022:The door opened again, the man reappeared; he carried in both hands the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21023:fabulous doll which we have mentioned, and which all the village brats
tests/les_miserables.txt:21024:had been staring at ever since the morning, and he set it upright in
tests/les_miserables.txt:21030:It must be supposed that in the course of the hour and more which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:21031:had spent there he had taken confused notice through his reverie of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21032:that toy shop, lighted up by fire-pots and candles so splendidly that
tests/les_miserables.txt:21036:Cosette raised her eyes; she gazed at the man approaching her with that
tests/les_miserables.txt:21037:doll as she might have gazed at the sun; she heard the unprecedented
tests/les_miserables.txt:21040:table in a corner of the wall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21042:She no longer cried; she no longer wept; she had the appearance of no
tests/les_miserables.txt:21046:drinkers had paused; a solemn silence reigned through the whole room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21048:Madame Thénardier, petrified and mute, recommenced her conjectures:
tests/les_miserables.txt:21053:The face of the male Thénardier presented that expressive fold which
tests/les_miserables.txt:21054:accentuates the human countenance whenever the dominant instinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:21055:appears there in all its bestial force. The tavern-keeper stared
tests/les_miserables.txt:21056:alternately at the doll and at the traveller; he seemed to be scenting
tests/les_miserables.txt:21057:out the man, as he would have scented out a bag of money. This did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:21058:last longer than the space of a flash of lightning. He stepped up to
tests/les_miserables.txt:21059:his wife and said to her in a low voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21061:“That machine costs at least thirty francs. No nonsense. Down on your
tests/les_miserables.txt:21065:Gross natures have this in common with _naïve_ natures, that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:21068:“Well, Cosette,” said the Thénardier, in a voice that strove to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:21069:sweet, and which was composed of the bitter honey of malicious women,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21076:Thénardier, with a caressing air. “Take it; it is yours.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21079:Cosette gazed at the marvellous doll in a sort of terror. Her face was
tests/les_miserables.txt:21083:“Little one, you are the Queen of France.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21086:It seemed to her that if she touched that doll, lightning would dart
tests/les_miserables.txt:21089:This was true, up to a certain point, for she said to herself that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21090:Thénardier would scold and beat her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21092:Nevertheless, the attraction carried the day. She ended by drawing near
tests/les_miserables.txt:21098:No words can render that air, at once despairing, terrified, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21099:ecstatic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21101:“Pardi!” cried the Thénardier, “it is yours. The gentleman has given it
tests/les_miserables.txt:21109:reached that point of emotion where a man does not speak for fear lest
tests/les_miserables.txt:21110:he should weep. He nodded to Cosette, and placed the “lady’s” hand in
tests/les_miserables.txt:21114:scorched her, and began to stare at the floor. We are forced to add
tests/les_miserables.txt:21115:that at that moment she stuck out her tongue immoderately. All at once
tests/les_miserables.txt:21118:“I shall call her Catherine,” she said.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21120:It was an odd moment when Cosette’s rags met and clasped the ribbons
tests/les_miserables.txt:21123:“Madame,” she resumed, “may I put her on a chair?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21126:“Yes, my child,” replied the Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21130:Cosette placed Catherine on a chair, then seated herself on the floor
tests/les_miserables.txt:21132:an attitude of contemplation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21136:“Oh! I am playing,” returned the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21139:which Providence was making on Cosette, was the person whom the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21141:However, it was necessary to control herself. Habituated as she was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:21142:dissimulation through endeavoring to copy her husband in all his
tests/les_miserables.txt:21143:actions, these emotions were more than she could endure. She made haste
tests/les_miserables.txt:21146:with a maternal air. Cosette went off to bed, carrying Catherine in her
tests/les_miserables.txt:21151:exchanged with her husband words which were all the more furious
tests/les_miserables.txt:21152:because she dared not utter them aloud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21154:“Old beast! What has he got in his belly, to come and upset us in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:21155:manner! To want that little monster to play! to give away forty-franc
tests/les_miserables.txt:21158:Duchesse de Berry! Is there any sense in it? Is he mad, then, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:21162:“Why! it is perfectly simple,” replied Thénardier, “if that amuses him!
tests/les_miserables.txt:21164:play. He’s all right. A traveller can do what he pleases when he pays
tests/les_miserables.txt:21166:he is an imbecile, it does not concern you. What are you worrying for,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21171:which admitted of any reply.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21173:The man had placed his elbows on the table, and resumed his thoughtful
tests/les_miserables.txt:21174:attitude. All the other travellers, both pedlers and carters, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:21175:withdrawn a little, and had ceased singing. They were staring at him
tests/les_miserables.txt:21176:from a distance, with a sort of respectful awe. This poorly dressed
tests/les_miserables.txt:21177:man, who drew “hind-wheels” from his pocket with so much ease, and who
tests/les_miserables.txt:21178:lavished gigantic dolls on dirty little brats in wooden shoes, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:21179:certainly a magnificent fellow, and one to be feared.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21181:Many hours passed. The midnight mass was over, the chimes had ceased,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21182:the drinkers had taken their departure, the drinking-shop was closed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21183:the public room was deserted, the fire extinct, the stranger still
tests/les_miserables.txt:21184:remained in the same place and the same attitude. From time to time he
tests/les_miserables.txt:21185:changed the elbow on which he leaned. That was all; but he had not said
tests/les_miserables.txt:21186:a word since Cosette had left the room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21188:The Thénardiers alone, out of politeness and curiosity, had remained in
tests/les_miserables.txt:21192:Thénardier. When two o’clock in the morning struck, she declared
tests/les_miserables.txt:21194:you like.” Her husband seated himself at a table in the corner, lighted
tests/les_miserables.txt:21195:a candle, and began to read the _Courrier Français_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21201:Thénardier fidgeted, coughed, spit, blew his nose, and creaked his
tests/les_miserables.txt:21202:chair. Not a movement on the man’s part. “Is he asleep?” thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:21203:Thénardier. The man was not asleep, but nothing could arouse him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21205:At last Thénardier took off his cap, stepped gently up to him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21211:_Not going to bed_ would have seemed to him excessive and familiar. _To
tests/les_miserables.txt:21212:repose_ smacked of luxury and respect. These words possess the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21214:day. A chamber where one _sleeps_ costs twenty sous; a chamber in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:21215:one _reposes_ costs twenty francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21220:“Sir!” exclaimed Thénardier, with a smile, “I will conduct you, sir.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21223:He took the candle; the man picked up his bundle and cudgel, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21224:Thénardier conducted him to a chamber on the first floor, which was of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21226:curtained with red calico.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21230:“It is really our bridal chamber,” said the tavern-keeper. “My wife and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21231:I occupy another. This is only entered three or four times a year.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21238:He lighted two perfectly fresh wax candles which figured on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21239:chimney-piece. A very good fire was flickering on the hearth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21241:On the chimney-piece, under a glass globe, stood a woman’s head-dress
tests/les_miserables.txt:21249:The traveller surveyed the object with a glance which seemed to say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21254:the purpose of converting it into a tavern, he had found this chamber
tests/les_miserables.txt:21255:decorated in just this manner, and had purchased the furniture and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21256:obtained the orange flowers at second hand, with the idea that this
tests/les_miserables.txt:21257:would cast a graceful shadow on “his spouse,” and would result in what
tests/les_miserables.txt:21258:the English call respectability for his house.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21261:had withdrawn discreetly, without venturing to wish him a good night,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21262:as he did not wish to treat with disrespectful cordiality a man whom he
tests/les_miserables.txt:21263:proposed to fleece royally the following morning.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21272:Thénardier replied coldly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21277:They exchanged no further words, and a few moments later their candle
tests/les_miserables.txt:21280:As for the traveller, he had deposited his cudgel and his bundle in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21281:corner. The landlord once gone, he threw himself into an armchair and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21283:took one of the two candles, blew out the other, opened the door, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21284:quitted the room, gazing about him like a person who is in search of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21285:something. He traversed a corridor and came upon a staircase. There he
tests/les_miserables.txt:21286:heard a very faint and gentle sound like the breathing of a child. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:21287:followed this sound, and came to a sort of triangular recess built
tests/les_miserables.txt:21288:under the staircase, or rather formed by the staircase itself. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:21289:recess was nothing else than the space under the steps. There, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21291:webs, was a bed—if one can call by the name of bed a straw pallet so
tests/les_miserables.txt:21292:full of holes as to display the straw, and a coverlet so tattered as to
tests/les_miserables.txt:21293:show the pallet. No sheets. This was placed on the floor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21297:The man approached and gazed down upon her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21300:she did not undress, in order that she might not be so cold.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21305:almost convulsively in her arms. Beside her bed there was only one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21308:A door which stood open near Cosette’s pallet permitted a view of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21312:hidden, stood an uncurtained wicker cradle, in which the little boy who
tests/les_miserables.txt:21313:had cried all the evening lay asleep.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21315:The stranger conjectured that this chamber connected with that of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21317:upon the fireplace—one of those vast tavern chimneys where there is
tests/les_miserables.txt:21318:always so little fire when there is any fire at all, and which are so
tests/les_miserables.txt:21319:cold to look at. There was no fire in this one, there was not even
tests/les_miserables.txt:21320:ashes; but there was something which attracted the stranger’s gaze,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21321:nevertheless. It was two tiny children’s shoes, coquettish in shape and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21322:unequal in size. The traveller recalled the graceful and immemorial
tests/les_miserables.txt:21323:custom in accordance with which children place their shoes in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21324:chimney on Christmas eve, there to await in the darkness some sparkling
tests/les_miserables.txt:21325:gift from their good fairy. Éponine and Azelma had taken care not to
tests/les_miserables.txt:21326:omit this, and each of them had set one of her shoes on the hearth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21331:and in each he saw a brand-new and shining ten-sou piece.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21334:when far in, in the darkest corner of the hearth, he caught sight of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21335:another object. He looked at it, and recognized a wooden shoe, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21336:frightful shoe of the coarsest description, half dilapidated and all
tests/les_miserables.txt:21337:covered with ashes and dried mud. It was Cosette’s sabot. Cosette, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:21338:that touching trust of childhood, which can always be deceived yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:21339:never discouraged, had placed her shoe on the hearth-stone also.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21341:Hope in a child who has never known anything but despair is a sweet and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21342:touching thing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21346:The stranger fumbled in his waistcoat, bent over and placed a louis
tests/les_miserables.txt:21349:Then he regained his own chamber with the stealthy tread of a wolf.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21358:Thénardier, seated beside a candle in the public room of the tavern,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21360:coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21363:him with her eyes. They exchanged not a word. On the one hand, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:21365:which one watches the birth and development of a marvel of the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:21370:Thénardier produced the following masterpiece:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21374:Supper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3 francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21378:Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1   ”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21380:Total . . . . . .                        23 francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21383:Service was written _servisse_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21385:“Twenty-three francs!” cried the woman, with an enthusiasm which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:21390:“Peuh!” he exclaimed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21392:It was the accent of Castlereagh auditing France’s bill at the Congress
tests/les_miserables.txt:21395:“Monsieur Thénardier, you are right; he certainly owes that,” murmured
tests/les_miserables.txt:21397:presence of her daughters. “It is just, but it is too much. He will not
tests/les_miserables.txt:21401:Thénardier laughed coldly, as usual, and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21406:This laugh was the supreme assertion of certainty and authority. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:21407:which was asserted in this manner must needs be so. His wife did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:21410:She set about arranging the table; her husband paced the room. A moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:21413:“I owe full fifteen hundred francs!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21416:He went and seated himself in the chimney-corner, meditating, with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:21437:The yellow man carried his bundle and his cudgel in his hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21444:embarrassed air, and making creases in it with her nails. Her hard face
tests/les_miserables.txt:21445:presented a shade which was not habitual with it,—timidity and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21446:scruples.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21448:To present such a bill to a man who had so completely the air “of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21449:poor wretch” seemed difficult to her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21451:The traveller appeared to be preoccupied and absent-minded. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:21465:The man unfolded the paper and glanced at it; but his thoughts were
tests/les_miserables.txt:21474:She continued, in a dreary and lamentable tone:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21478:and then, some rich and generous travellers like Monsieur, we should
tests/les_miserables.txt:21479:not get along at all. We have so many expenses. Just see, that child is
tests/les_miserables.txt:21480:costing us our very eyes.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21483:“What child?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21486:“Why, the little one, you know! Cosette—the Lark, as she is called
tests/les_miserables.txt:21494:“How stupid these peasants are with their nicknames! She has more the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21495:air of a bat than of a lark. You see, sir, we do not ask charity, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21496:we cannot bestow it. We earn nothing and we have to pay out a great
tests/les_miserables.txt:21497:deal. The license, the imposts, the door and window tax, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21500:up other people’s children.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21503:The man resumed, in that voice which he strove to render indifferent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21504:and in which there lingered a tremor:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21515:The landlady’s red and violent face brightened up hideously.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21517:“Ah! sir, my dear sir, take her, keep her, lead her off, carry her
tests/les_miserables.txt:21535:“Immediately. Call the child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21538:“Cosette!” screamed the Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21541:much is it?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21544:He cast a glance on the bill, and could not restrain a start of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21547:“Twenty-three francs!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21552:“Twenty-three francs?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21555:There was in the enunciation of these words, thus repeated, an accent
tests/les_miserables.txt:21556:between an exclamation and an interrogation point.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21558:The Thénardier had had time to prepare herself for the shock. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:21559:replied, with assurance:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21561:“Good gracious, yes, sir, it is twenty-three francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21564:The stranger laid five five-franc pieces on the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21566:“Go and get the child,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21568:At that moment Thénardier advanced to the middle of the room, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21574:“Twenty-six sous!” exclaimed his wife.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21576:“Twenty sous for the chamber,” resumed Thénardier, coldly, “and six
tests/les_miserables.txt:21577:sous for his supper. As for the child, I must discuss that matter a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21581:Madame Thénardier was dazzled as with the shock caused by unexpected
tests/les_miserables.txt:21582:lightning flashes of talent. She was conscious that a great actor was
tests/les_miserables.txt:21583:making his entrance on the stage, uttered not a word in reply, and left
tests/les_miserables.txt:21586:As soon as they were alone, Thénardier offered the traveller a chair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21588:face assumed a singular expression of good-fellowship and simplicity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21591:child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21596:“What child?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21599:Thénardier continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21601:“How strange it is, one grows attached. What money is that? Take back
tests/les_miserables.txt:21602:your hundred-sou piece. I adore the child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21609:consent to it. I shall miss that child. I saw her first when she was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21610:tiny thing. It is true that she costs us money; it is true that she has
tests/les_miserables.txt:21611:her faults; it is true that we are not rich; it is true that I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:21612:paid out over four hundred francs for drugs for just one of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:21615:for her and for myself. In truth, I think a great deal of that child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21616:You understand, one conceives an affection for a person; I am a good
tests/les_miserables.txt:21618:wife is quick-tempered, but she loves her also. You see, she is just
tests/les_miserables.txt:21619:the same as our own child. I want to keep her to babble about the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21624:continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21626:“Excuse me, sir, but one does not give away one’s child to a passer-by,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21627:like that. I am right, am I not? Still, I don’t say—you are rich; you
tests/les_miserables.txt:21630:and to sacrifice myself, I should like to know what becomes of her; I
tests/les_miserables.txt:21632:she is living, so that I could go to see her from time to time; so that
tests/les_miserables.txt:21633:she may know that her good foster-father is alive, that he is watching
tests/les_miserables.txt:21634:over her. In short, there are things which are not possible. I do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:21636:and the Lark, what has become of her?’ One must, at least, see some
tests/les_miserables.txt:21637:petty scrap of paper, some trifle in the way of a passport, you know!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21640:The stranger, still surveying him with that gaze which penetrates, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:21641:the saying goes, to the very depths of the conscience, replied in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21642:grave, firm voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21647:know my residence, you will not know where she is; and my intention is
tests/les_miserables.txt:21649:break the thread which binds her foot, and she departs. Does that suit
tests/les_miserables.txt:21653:Since geniuses, like demons, recognize the presence of a superior God
tests/les_miserables.txt:21654:by certain signs, Thénardier comprehended that he had to deal with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21655:very strong person. It was like an intuition; he comprehended it with
tests/les_miserables.txt:21656:his clear and sagacious promptitude. While drinking with the carters,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21657:smoking, and singing coarse songs on the preceding evening, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:21658:devoted the whole of the time to observing the stranger, watching him
tests/les_miserables.txt:21659:like a cat, and studying him like a mathematician. He had watched him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21660:both on his own account, for the pleasure of the thing, and through
tests/les_miserables.txt:21661:instinct, and had spied upon him as though he had been paid for so
tests/les_miserables.txt:21663:yellow great-coat had escaped him. Even before the stranger had so
tests/les_miserables.txt:21664:clearly manifested his interest in Cosette, Thénardier had divined his
tests/les_miserables.txt:21665:purpose. He had caught the old man’s deep glances returning constantly
tests/les_miserables.txt:21666:to the child. Who was this man? Why this interest? Why this hideous
tests/les_miserables.txt:21667:costume, when he had so much money in his purse? Questions which he put
tests/les_miserables.txt:21668:to himself without being able to solve them, and which irritated him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21669:He had pondered it all night long. He could not be Cosette’s father.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21670:Was he her grandfather? Then why not make himself known at once? When
tests/les_miserables.txt:21672:Cosette. What was it, then? Thénardier lost himself in conjectures. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:21673:caught glimpses of everything, but he saw nothing. Be that as it may,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21674:on entering into conversation with the man, sure that there was some
tests/les_miserables.txt:21675:secret in the case, that the latter had some interest in remaining in
tests/les_miserables.txt:21676:the shadow, he felt himself strong; when he perceived from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21677:stranger’s clear and firm retort, that this mysterious personage was
tests/les_miserables.txt:21678:mysterious in so simple a way, he became conscious that he was weak. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:21679:had expected nothing of the sort. His conjectures were put to the rout.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21680:He rallied his ideas. He weighed everything in the space of a second.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21681:Thénardier was one of those men who take in a situation at a glance. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:21682:decided that the moment had arrived for proceeding straightforward, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21683:quickly at that. He did as great leaders do at the decisive moment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21684:which they know that they alone recognize; he abruptly unmasked his
tests/les_miserables.txt:21687:“Sir,” said he, “I am in need of fifteen hundred francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21690:The stranger took from his side pocket an old pocketbook of black
tests/les_miserables.txt:21691:leather, opened it, drew out three bank-bills, which he laid on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21692:table. Then he placed his large thumb on the notes and said to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21695:“Go and fetch Cosette.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21698:While this was taking place, what had Cosette been doing?
tests/les_miserables.txt:21701:gold piece. It was not a Napoleon; it was one of those perfectly new
tests/les_miserables.txt:21702:twenty-franc pieces of the Restoration, on whose effigy the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:21703:Prussian queue had replaced the laurel wreath. Cosette was dazzled. Her
tests/les_miserables.txt:21704:destiny began to intoxicate her. She did not know what a gold piece
tests/les_miserables.txt:21705:was; she had never seen one; she hid it quickly in her pocket, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:21707:guessed whence her gift had come, but the joy which she experienced was
tests/les_miserables.txt:21708:full of fear. She was happy; above all she was stupefied. Such
tests/les_miserables.txt:21709:magnificent and beautiful things did not appear real. The doll
tests/les_miserables.txt:21710:frightened her, the gold piece frightened her. She trembled vaguely in
tests/les_miserables.txt:21711:the presence of this magnificence. The stranger alone did not frighten
tests/les_miserables.txt:21712:her. On the contrary, he reassured her. Ever since the preceding
tests/les_miserables.txt:21714:thinking in her little childish mind of that man who seemed to be so
tests/les_miserables.txt:21715:poor and so sad, and who was so rich and so kind. Everything had
tests/les_miserables.txt:21716:changed for her since she had met that good man in the forest. Cosette,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21717:less happy than the most insignificant swallow of heaven, had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:21719:wing. For the last five years, that is to say, as far back as her
tests/les_miserables.txt:21720:memory ran, the poor child had shivered and trembled. She had always
tests/les_miserables.txt:21721:been exposed completely naked to the sharp wind of adversity; now it
tests/les_miserables.txt:21722:seemed to her she was clothed. Formerly her soul had seemed cold, now
tests/les_miserables.txt:21726:She hastily set about her regular morning duties. That louis, which she
tests/les_miserables.txt:21727:had about her, in the very apron pocket whence the fifteen-sou piece
tests/les_miserables.txt:21728:had fallen on the night before, distracted her thoughts. She dared not
tests/les_miserables.txt:21729:touch it, but she spent five minutes in gazing at it, with her tongue
tests/les_miserables.txt:21730:hanging out, if the truth must be told. As she swept the staircase, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:21732:of the entire universe, occupied in gazing at that star which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:21733:blazing at the bottom of her pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21735:It was during one of these periods of contemplation that the Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:21736:joined her. She had gone in search of Cosette at her husband’s orders.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21737:What was quite unprecedented, she neither struck her nor said an
tests/les_miserables.txt:21740:“Cosette,” she said, almost gently, “come immediately.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21743:An instant later Cosette entered the public room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21745:The stranger took up the bundle which he had brought and untied it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21746:This bundle contained a little woollen gown, an apron, a fustian
tests/les_miserables.txt:21747:bodice, a kerchief, a petticoat, woollen stockings, shoes—a complete
tests/les_miserables.txt:21748:outfit for a girl of seven years. All was black.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21750:“My child,” said the man, “take these, and go and dress yourself
tests/les_miserables.txt:21751:quickly.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21755:had begun to open their doors beheld a poorly clad old man leading a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21756:little girl dressed in mourning, and carrying a pink doll in her arms,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21757:pass along the road to Paris. They were going in the direction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21763:recognize her. Cosette was going away. With whom? She did not know.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21769:Poor, gentle creature, whose heart had been repressed up to that hour!
tests/les_miserables.txt:21772:at the sky. She had put her louis in the pocket of her new apron. From
tests/les_miserables.txt:21773:time to time, she bent down and glanced at it; then she looked at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21783:her wont. She had expected great results. When the man and Cosette had
tests/les_miserables.txt:21786:francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21790:It was the first time since they had set up housekeeping that she had
tests/les_miserables.txt:21791:dared to criticise one of the master’s acts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21798:He folded up the three bank-bills, thrust them into his pocket, and ran
tests/les_miserables.txt:21800:Some neighbors, of whom he made inquiries, put him on the track again;
tests/les_miserables.txt:21801:the Lark and the man had been seen going in the direction of Livry. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:21806:First he gave twenty sous, then five francs, then fifty francs, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:21807:fifteen hundred francs, all with equal readiness. He would have given
tests/les_miserables.txt:21808:fifteen thousand francs. But I shall overtake him.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21811:And then, that bundle of clothes prepared beforehand for the child; all
tests/les_miserables.txt:21812:that was singular; many mysteries lay concealed under it. One does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:21813:let mysteries out of one’s hand when one has once grasped them. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:21814:secrets of the wealthy are sponges of gold; one must know how to
tests/les_miserables.txt:21815:subject them to pressure. All these thoughts whirled through his brain.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21818:When one leaves Montfermeil and reaches the turn which the road takes
tests/les_miserables.txt:21819:that runs to Livry, it can be seen stretching out before one to a great
tests/les_miserables.txt:21820:distance across the plateau. On arriving there, he calculated that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:21821:ought to be able to see the old man and the child. He looked as far as
tests/les_miserables.txt:21822:his vision reached, and saw nothing. He made fresh inquiries, but he
tests/les_miserables.txt:21823:had wasted time. Some passers-by informed him that the man and child of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21824:whom he was in search had gone towards the forest in the direction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21825:Gagny. He hastened in that direction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21827:They were far in advance of him; but a child walks slowly, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:21828:walked fast; and then, he was well acquainted with the country.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21830:All at once he paused and dealt himself a blow on his forehead like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21831:man who has forgotten some essential point and who is ready to retrace
tests/les_miserables.txt:21836:Thénardier was one of those double natures which sometimes pass through
tests/les_miserables.txt:21837:our midst without our being aware of the fact, and who disappear
tests/les_miserables.txt:21838:without our finding them out, because destiny has only exhibited one
tests/les_miserables.txt:21840:In a calm and even situation, Thénardier possessed all that is required
tests/les_miserables.txt:21841:to make—we will not say to be—what people have agreed to call an honest
tests/les_miserables.txt:21842:trader, a good bourgeois. At the same time certain circumstances being
tests/les_miserables.txt:21843:given, certain shocks arriving to bring his under-nature to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21844:surface, he had all the requisites for a blackguard. He was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21846:occasionally crouched down in some corner of the hovel in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:21847:Thénardier dwelt, and have fallen a-dreaming in the presence of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:21848:hideous masterpiece.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21852:“Bah!” he thought; “they will have time to make their escape.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21856:almost an air of certainty, with the sagacity of a fox scenting a covey
tests/les_miserables.txt:21860:direction the large clearing which lies on the right of the Avenue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:21861:Bellevue, and reached that turf alley which nearly makes the circuit of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21862:the hill, and covers the arch of the ancient aqueduct of the Abbey of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21863:Chelles, he caught sight, over the top of the brushwood, of the hat on
tests/les_miserables.txt:21864:which he had already erected so many conjectures; it was that man’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:21865:hat. The brushwood was not high. Thénardier recognized the fact that
tests/les_miserables.txt:21866:the man and Cosette were sitting there. The child could not be seen on
tests/les_miserables.txt:21867:account of her small size, but the head of her doll was visible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21872:search of.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21874:“Pardon, excuse me, sir,” he said, quite breathless, “but here are your
tests/les_miserables.txt:21875:fifteen hundred francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21885:Thénardier replied respectfully:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21887:“It means, sir, that I shall take back Cosette.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21890:Cosette shuddered, and pressed close to the old man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21893:and enunciating every syllable distinctly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:21895:“You are go-ing to take back Co-sette?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21898:“Yes, sir, I am. I will tell you; I have considered the matter. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:21899:fact, I have not the right to give her to you. I am an honest man, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:21900:see; this child does not belong to me; she belongs to her mother. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:21901:was her mother who confided her to me; I can only resign her to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:21903:case I can only give the child up to the person who shall bring me a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21904:writing, signed by her mother, to the effect that I am to hand the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21905:child over to the person therein mentioned; that is clear.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21908:The man, without making any reply, fumbled in his pocket, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21909:Thénardier beheld the pocket-book of bank-bills make its appearance
tests/les_miserables.txt:21910:once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21917:Before opening the pocket-book, the traveller cast a glance about him:
tests/les_miserables.txt:21919:woods or in the valley. The man opened his pocket-book once more and
tests/les_miserables.txt:21920:drew from it, not the handful of bills which Thénardier expected, but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21921:simple little paper, which he unfolded and presented fully open to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21929:“M. SUR M., March 25, 1823.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21935:I have the honor to salute you with respect,
tests/les_miserables.txt:21941:It certainly was Fantine’s signature; Thénardier recognized it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21943:There was no reply to make; he experienced two violent vexations, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21944:vexation of renouncing the bribery which he had hoped for, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21947:“You may keep this paper as your receipt.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21958:“It is well, sir,” he said, “since you are the person, but I must be
tests/les_miserables.txt:21965:“Monsieur Thénardier, in January last, the mother reckoned that she
tests/les_miserables.txt:21966:owed you one hundred and twenty francs. In February, you sent her a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21967:bill of five hundred francs; you received three hundred francs at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21968:end of February, and three hundred francs at the beginning of March.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21969:Since then nine months have elapsed, at fifteen francs a month, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:21970:price agreed upon, which makes one hundred and thirty-five francs. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:21971:had received one hundred francs too much; that makes thirty-five still
tests/les_miserables.txt:21972:owing you. I have just given you fifteen hundred francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21980:He did what the wolf does: he shook himself. Audacity had succeeded
tests/les_miserables.txt:21981:with him once.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21984:casting aside all respectful ceremony, “I shall take back Cosette if
tests/les_miserables.txt:21985:you do not give me a thousand crowns.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:21993:He took Cosette by his left hand, and with his right he picked up his
tests/les_miserables.txt:21994:cudgel, which was lying on the ground.
tests/les_miserables.txt:21996:Thénardier noted the enormous size of the cudgel and the solitude of
tests/les_miserables.txt:21999:The man plunged into the forest with the child, leaving the inn-keeper
tests/les_miserables.txt:22000:motionless and speechless.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22002:While they were walking away, Thénardier scrutinized his huge
tests/les_miserables.txt:22003:shoulders, which were a little rounded, and his great fists.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22005:Then, bringing his eyes back to his own person, they fell upon his
tests/les_miserables.txt:22006:feeble arms and his thin hands. “I really must have been exceedingly
tests/les_miserables.txt:22007:stupid not to have thought to bring my gun,” he said to himself, “since
tests/les_miserables.txt:22014:them at a distance. Two things were left on his hands, an irony in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22015:shape of the paper signed _Fantine_, and a consolation, the fifteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:22016:hundred francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22018:The man led Cosette off in the direction of Livry and Bondy. He walked
tests/les_miserables.txt:22019:slowly, with drooping head, in an attitude of reflection and sadness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22021:them from sight, although he kept at a good distance. The man turned
tests/les_miserables.txt:22023:All at once he caught sight of Thénardier. He plunged suddenly into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22024:brushwood with Cosette, where they could both hide themselves. “The
tests/les_miserables.txt:22025:deuce!” said Thénardier, and he redoubled his pace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22027:The thickness of the undergrowth forced him to draw nearer to them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22028:When the man had reached the densest part of the thicket, he wheeled
tests/les_miserables.txt:22029:round. It was in vain that Thénardier sought to conceal himself in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22030:branches; he could not prevent the man seeing him. The man cast upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:22031:him an uneasy glance, then elevated his head and continued his course.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22032:The inn-keeper set out again in pursuit. Thus they continued for two or
tests/les_miserables.txt:22033:three hundred paces. All at once the man turned round once more; he saw
tests/les_miserables.txt:22035:Thénardier decided that it was “useless” to proceed further. Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:22036:retraced his steps.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22047:was not ironed, as we have seen. He swam under water until he reached a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22048:vessel at anchor, to which a boat was moored. He found means of hiding
tests/les_miserables.txt:22050:reached the shore a little way from Cape Brun. There, as he did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:22051:lack money, he procured clothing. A small country-house in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22052:neighborhood of Balaguier was at that time the dressing-room of escaped
tests/les_miserables.txt:22053:convicts,—a lucrative specialty. Then Jean Valjean, like all the sorry
tests/les_miserables.txt:22054:fugitives who are seeking to evade the vigilance of the law and social
tests/les_miserables.txt:22055:fatality, pursued an obscure and undulating itinerary. He found his
tests/les_miserables.txt:22056:first refuge at Pradeaux, near Beausset. Then he directed his course
tests/les_miserables.txt:22058:fumbling and uneasy flight,—a mole’s track, whose branchings are
tests/les_miserables.txt:22059:untraceable. Later on, some trace of his passage into Ain, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22060:territory of Civrieux, was discovered; in the Pyrenees, at Accons; at
tests/les_miserables.txt:22061:the spot called Grange-de-Doumec, near the market of Chavailles, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22062:the environs of Perigueux at Brunies, canton of La Chapelle-Gonaguet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22063:He reached Paris. We have just seen him at Montfermeil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22065:His first care on arriving in Paris had been to buy mourning clothes
tests/les_miserables.txt:22066:for a little girl of from seven to eight years of age; then to procure
tests/les_miserables.txt:22068:remembered that already, during his preceding escape, he had made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22069:mysterious trip thither, or somewhere in that neighborhood, of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:22072:However, he was thought to be dead, and this still further increased
tests/les_miserables.txt:22073:the obscurity which had gathered about him. At Paris, one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22074:journals which chronicled the fact fell into his hands. He felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:22075:reassured and almost at peace, as though he had really been dead.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22077:On the evening of the day when Jean Valjean rescued Cosette from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22078:claws of the Thénardiers, he returned to Paris. He re-entered it at
tests/les_miserables.txt:22079:nightfall, with the child, by way of the Barrier Monceaux. There he
tests/les_miserables.txt:22080:entered a cabriolet, which took him to the esplanade of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22081:Observatoire. There he got out, paid the coachman, took Cosette by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22082:hand, and together they directed their steps through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22083:darkness,—through the deserted streets which adjoin the Ourcine and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22084:Glacière, towards the Boulevard de l’Hôpital.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22087:eaten some bread and cheese purchased in isolated taverns, behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:22088:hedges; they had changed carriages frequently; they had travelled short
tests/les_miserables.txt:22089:distances on foot. She made no complaint, but she was weary, and Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:22090:Valjean perceived it by the way she dragged more and more on his hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:22091:as she walked. He took her on his back. Cosette, without letting go of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22111:Forty years ago, a rambler who had ventured into that unknown country
tests/les_miserables.txt:22113:of the boulevard, reached a point where it might be said that Paris
tests/les_miserables.txt:22115:was not the country, for there were houses and streets; it was not the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22116:city, for the streets had ruts like highways, and the grass grew in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22119:place where there was some one; it was a boulevard of the great city, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22121:than a cemetery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22123:It was the old quarter of the Marché-aux-Chevaux.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22125:The rambler, if he risked himself outside the four decrepit walls of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22126:this Marché-aux-Chevaux; if he consented even to pass beyond the Rue du
tests/les_miserables.txt:22127:Petit-Banquier, after leaving on his right a garden protected by high
tests/les_miserables.txt:22128:walls; then a field in which tan-bark mills rose like gigantic beaver
tests/les_miserables.txt:22129:huts; then an enclosure encumbered with timber, with a heap of stumps,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22130:sawdust, and shavings, on which stood a large dog, barking; then a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22131:long, low, utterly dilapidated wall, with a little black door in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22132:mourning, laden with mosses, which were covered with flowers in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22133:spring; then, in the most deserted spot, a frightful and decrepit
tests/les_miserables.txt:22134:building, on which ran the inscription in large letters: POST NO
tests/les_miserables.txt:22135:BILLS,—this daring rambler would have reached little known latitudes at
tests/les_miserables.txt:22136:the corner of the Rue des Vignes-Saint-Marcel. There, near a factory,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22137:and between two garden walls, there could be seen, at that epoch, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22138:mean building, which, at the first glance, seemed as small as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22139:thatched hovel, and which was, in reality, as large as a cathedral. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:22140:presented its side and gable to the public road; hence its apparent
tests/les_miserables.txt:22142:and one window could be seen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22146:The first detail that struck the observer was, that the door could
tests/les_miserables.txt:22148:it had been carved out of dressed stone instead of being in rough
tests/les_miserables.txt:22149:masonry, might have been the lattice of a lordly mansion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22151:The door was nothing but a collection of worm-eaten planks roughly
tests/les_miserables.txt:22152:bound together by cross-beams which resembled roughly hewn logs. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:22153:opened directly on a steep staircase of lofty steps, muddy, chalky,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22154:plaster-stained, dusty steps, of the same width as itself, which could
tests/les_miserables.txt:22157:shapeless bay into which this door shut was masked by a narrow
tests/les_miserables.txt:22158:scantling in the centre of which a triangular hole had been sawed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22159:which served both as wicket and air-hole when the door was closed. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:22160:the inside of the door the figures 52 had been traced with a couple of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22161:strokes of a brush dipped in ink, and above the scantling the same hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:22164:one knows what dust-colored figures were suspended like draperies from
tests/les_miserables.txt:22167:The window was large, sufficiently elevated, garnished with Venetian
tests/les_miserables.txt:22169:were suffering from various wounds, which were both concealed and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22170:betrayed by an ingenious paper bandage. And the blinds, dislocated and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22171:unpasted, threatened passers-by rather than screened the occupants. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:22173:replaced with boards nailed on perpendicularly; so that what began as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22174:blind ended as a shutter. This door with an unclean, and this window
tests/les_miserables.txt:22176:produced the effect of two incomplete beggars walking side by side,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22178:a mendicant, and the other having once been a gentleman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22180:The staircase led to a very vast edifice which resembled a shed which
tests/les_miserables.txt:22181:had been converted into a house. This edifice had, for its intestinal
tests/les_miserables.txt:22182:tube, a long corridor, on which opened to right and left sorts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22183:compartments of varied dimensions which were inhabitable under stress
tests/les_miserables.txt:22184:of circumstances, and rather more like stalls than cells. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:22185:chambers received their light from the vague waste grounds in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22188:All this was dark, disagreeable, wan, melancholy, sepulchral; traversed
tests/les_miserables.txt:22189:according as the crevices lay in the roof or in the door, by cold rays
tests/les_miserables.txt:22190:or by icy winds. An interesting and picturesque peculiarity of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:22193:To the left of the entrance door, on the boulevard side, at about the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22194:height of a man from the ground, a small window which had been walled
tests/les_miserables.txt:22195:up formed a square niche full of stones which the children had thrown
tests/les_miserables.txt:22198:A portion of this building has recently been demolished. From what
tests/les_miserables.txt:22199:still remains of it one can form a judgment as to what it was in former
tests/les_miserables.txt:22201:is youth in a church and age in a house. It seems as though man’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:22202:lodging partook of his ephemeral character, and God’s house of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:22205:The postmen called the house Number 50-52; but it was known in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22208:Let us explain whence this appellation was derived.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22210:Collectors of petty details, who become herbalists of anecdotes, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22211:prick slippery dates into their memories with a pin, know that there
tests/les_miserables.txt:22212:was in Paris, during the last century, about 1770, two attorneys at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22216:in circulation in the galleries of the court-house, in verses that
tests/les_miserables.txt:22219:Maître Corbeau, sur un dossier perché,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22220:Tenait dans son bec une saisie exécutoire;
tests/les_miserables.txt:22221:Maître Renard, par l’odeur alléché,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22222:Lui fit à peu près cette histoire:
tests/les_miserables.txt:22223:Hé! bonjour.  Etc.13
tests/les_miserables.txt:22227:The two honest practitioners, embarrassed by the jests, and finding the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22228:bearing of their heads interfered with by the shouts of laughter which
tests/les_miserables.txt:22233:Papal Nuncio, on the one hand, and the Cardinal de la Roche-Aymon on
tests/les_miserables.txt:22234:the other, both devoutly kneeling, were each engaged in putting on, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22235:his Majesty’s presence, a slipper on the bare feet of Madame du Barry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22236:who had just got out of bed. The king, who was laughing, continued to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22239:the kings command, Maître Corbeau was permitted to add a tail to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:22240:initial letter and to call himself Gorbeau. Maître Renard was less
tests/les_miserables.txt:22241:lucky; all he obtained was leave to place a P in front of his R, and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22242:call himself Prenard; so that the second name bore almost as much
tests/les_miserables.txt:22243:resemblance as the first.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22245:Now, according to local tradition, this Maître Gorbeau had been the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22249:Hence the edifice bore the name of the Gorbeau house.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22252:which was three-quarters dead; almost directly facing it opens the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:22254:planted with unhealthy trees, which was green or muddy according to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22255:season, and which ended squarely in the exterior wall of Paris. An odor
tests/les_miserables.txt:22256:of copperas issued in puffs from the roofs of the neighboring factory.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22258:The barrier was close at hand. In 1823 the city wall was still in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22259:existence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22261:This barrier itself evoked gloomy fancies in the mind. It was the road
tests/les_miserables.txt:22262:to Bicêtre. It was through it that, under the Empire and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22263:Restoration, prisoners condemned to death re-entered Paris on the day
tests/les_miserables.txt:22264:of their execution. It was there, that, about 1829, was committed that
tests/les_miserables.txt:22265:mysterious assassination, called “The assassination of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22266:Fontainebleau barrier,” whose authors justice was never able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22267:discover; a melancholy problem which has never been elucidated, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22268:frightful enigma which has never been unriddled. Take a few steps, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22269:you come upon that fatal Rue Croulebarbe, where Ulbach stabbed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22271:paces more, and you arrive at the abominable pollarded elms of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22272:Barrière Saint-Jacques, that expedient of the philanthropist to conceal
tests/les_miserables.txt:22273:the scaffold, that miserable and shameful Place de Grève of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22274:shop-keeping and bourgeois society, which recoiled before the death
tests/les_miserables.txt:22278:Leaving aside this Place Saint-Jacques, which was, as it were,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22279:predestined, and which has always been horrible, probably the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:22281:was the spot which even to-day is so unattractive, where stood the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22285:The place was unpleasant. In addition to the gloomy thoughts which
tests/les_miserables.txt:22286:assailed one there, one was conscious of being between the Salpêtrière,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22287:a glimpse of whose dome could be seen, and Bicêtre, whose outskirts one
tests/les_miserables.txt:22288:was fairly touching; that is to say, between the madness of women and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22289:the madness of men. As far as the eye could see, one could perceive
tests/les_miserables.txt:22290:nothing but the abattoirs, the city wall, and the fronts of a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:22291:factories, resembling barracks or monasteries; everywhere about stood
tests/les_miserables.txt:22292:hovels, rubbish, ancient walls blackened like cerecloths, new white
tests/les_miserables.txt:22294:erected on a line, flat constructions, long, cold rows, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22295:melancholy sadness of right angles. Not an unevenness of the ground,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22296:not a caprice in the architecture, not a fold. The _ensemble_ was
tests/les_miserables.txt:22297:glacial, regular, hideous. Nothing oppresses the heart like symmetry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22298:It is because symmetry is ennui, and ennui is at the very foundation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22300:suffers may be imagined, and that is a hell where one is bored. If such
tests/les_miserables.txt:22302:formed the entrance to it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22305:vanishing, especially in winter, at the hour when the twilight breeze
tests/les_miserables.txt:22308:clouds and losing themselves in the shadows, this boulevard suddenly
tests/les_miserables.txt:22309:becomes frightful. The black lines sink inwards and are lost in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22310:shades, like morsels of the infinite. The passer-by cannot refrain from
tests/les_miserables.txt:22311:recalling the innumerable traditions of the place which are connected
tests/les_miserables.txt:22312:with the gibbet. The solitude of this spot, where so many crimes have
tests/les_miserables.txt:22313:been committed, had something terrible about it. One almost had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22314:presentiment of meeting with traps in that darkness; all the confused
tests/les_miserables.txt:22315:forms of the darkness seemed suspicious, and the long, hollow square,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22316:of which one caught a glimpse between each tree, seemed graves: by day
tests/les_miserables.txt:22317:it was ugly; in the evening melancholy; by night it was sinister.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22320:at the foot of the elm, on benches mouldy with rain. These good old
tests/les_miserables.txt:22323:However, this quarter, which had a superannuated rather than an antique
tests/les_miserables.txt:22325:who was desirous of seeing it had to make haste. Each day some detail
tests/les_miserables.txt:22326:of the whole effect was disappearing. For the last twenty years the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22328:distracted it, as it does to-day. Wherever it is placed on the borders
tests/les_miserables.txt:22329:of a capital, a railway station is the death of a suburb and the birth
tests/les_miserables.txt:22330:of a city. It seems as though, around these great centres of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22332:to engulf the ancient dwellings of men and to allow new ones to spring
tests/les_miserables.txt:22333:forth, at the rattle of these powerful machines, at the breath of these
tests/les_miserables.txt:22334:monstrous horses of civilization which devour coal and vomit fire. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:22335:old houses crumble and new ones rise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22337:Since the Orleans railway has invaded the region of the Salpêtrière,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22338:the ancient, narrow streets which adjoin the moats Saint-Victor and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22340:four times each day by those currents of coach fiacres and omnibuses
tests/les_miserables.txt:22341:which, in a given time, crowd back the houses to the right and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22342:left; for there are things which are odd when said that are rigorously
tests/les_miserables.txt:22343:exact; and just as it is true to say that in large cities the sun makes
tests/les_miserables.txt:22344:the southern fronts of houses to vegetate and grow, it is certain that
tests/les_miserables.txt:22345:the frequent passage of vehicles enlarges streets. The symptoms of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22346:new life are evident. In this old provincial quarter, in the wildest
tests/les_miserables.txt:22347:nooks, the pavement shows itself, the sidewalks begin to crawl and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22349:memorable morning in July, 1845,—black pots of bitumen were seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:22350:smoking there; on that day it might be said that civilization had
tests/les_miserables.txt:22351:arrived in the Rue de l’Ourcine, and that Paris had entered the suburb
tests/les_miserables.txt:22352:of Saint-Marceau.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22361:wild birds, he had chosen this desert place to construct his nest.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22363:He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket, drew out a sort of a pass-key,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22364:opened the door, entered, closed it again carefully, and ascended the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22365:staircase, still carrying Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22367:At the top of the stairs he drew from his pocket another key, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:22368:which he opened another door. The chamber which he entered, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:22369:he closed again instantly, was a kind of moderately spacious attic,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22371:chairs; a stove in which a fire was burning, and whose embers were
tests/les_miserables.txt:22372:visible, stood in one corner. A lantern on the boulevard cast a vague
tests/les_miserables.txt:22374:with a folding bed; Jean Valjean carried the child to this bed and laid
tests/les_miserables.txt:22377:He struck a match and lighted a candle. All this was prepared
tests/les_miserables.txt:22379:he began to scrutinize Cosette’s face with a gaze full of ecstasy, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22380:which the expression of kindness and tenderness almost amounted to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22381:aberration. The little girl, with that tranquil confidence which
tests/les_miserables.txt:22383:asleep without knowing with whom she was, and continued to sleep
tests/les_miserables.txt:22386:Jean Valjean bent down and kissed that child’s hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22391:The same sad, piercing, religious sentiment filled his heart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22395:lt was broad daylight, and the child still slept. A wan ray of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22396:December sun penetrated the window of the attic and lay upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22397:ceiling in long threads of light and shade. All at once a heavily laden
tests/les_miserables.txt:22398:carrier’s cart, which was passing along the boulevard, shook the frail
tests/les_miserables.txt:22399:bed, like a clap of thunder, and made it quiver from top to bottom.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22401:“Yes, madame!” cried Cosette, waking with a start, “here I am! here I
tests/les_miserables.txt:22406:of sleep, extending her arms towards the corner of the wall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22410:She opened her eyes wide now, and beheld the smiling countenance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22413:“Ah! so it is true!” said the child. “Good morning, Monsieur.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:22416:Children accept joy and happiness instantly and familiarly, being
tests/les_miserables.txt:22419:Cosette caught sight of Catherine at the foot of her bed, and took
tests/les_miserables.txt:22422:Thénardier very far away? Was she to go back? etc., etc. All at once
tests/les_miserables.txt:22423:she exclaimed, “How pretty it is here!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:22442:Cosette’s bedside; he watched there motionless, waiting for her to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22445:Some new thing had come into his soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22449:friend. In the prison he had been vicious, gloomy, chaste, ignorant,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22450:and shy. The heart of that ex-convict was full of virginity. His sister
tests/les_miserables.txt:22451:and his sister’s children had left him only a vague and far-off memory
tests/les_miserables.txt:22452:which had finally almost completely vanished; he had made every effort
tests/les_miserables.txt:22457:When he saw Cosette, when he had taken possession of her, carried her
tests/les_miserables.txt:22460:All the passion and affection within him awoke, and rushed towards that
tests/les_miserables.txt:22461:child. He approached the bed, where she lay sleeping, and trembled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:22463:meant; for that great and singular movement of a heart which begins to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22464:love is a very obscure and a very sweet thing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22466:Poor old man, with a perfectly new heart!
tests/les_miserables.txt:22469:that might have been love in the whole course of his life flowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:22472:It was the second white apparition which he had encountered. The Bishop
tests/les_miserables.txt:22473:had caused the dawn of virtue to rise on his horizon; Cosette caused
tests/les_miserables.txt:22478:Cosette, on her side, had also, unknown to herself, become another
tests/les_miserables.txt:22480:that she no longer remembered her. Like all children, who resemble
tests/les_miserables.txt:22481:young shoots of the vine, which cling to everything, she had tried to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22482:love; she had not succeeded. All had repulsed her,—the Thénardiers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22483:their children, other children. She had loved the dog, and he had died,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22484:after which nothing and nobody would have anything to do with her. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:22486:years of age, her heart was cold. It was not her fault; it was not the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22487:faculty of loving that she lacked; alas! it was the possibility. Thus,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22489:this kind man. She felt that which she had never felt before—a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22492:The man no longer produced on her the effect of being old or poor; she
tests/les_miserables.txt:22495:These are the effects of the dawn, of childhood, of joy. The novelty of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22496:the earth and of life counts for something here. Nothing is so charming
tests/les_miserables.txt:22497:as the coloring reflection of happiness on a garret. We all have in our
tests/les_miserables.txt:22500:Nature, a difference of fifty years, had set a profound gulf between
tests/les_miserables.txt:22503:existences, differing in age, alike in sorrow. One, in fact, completed
tests/les_miserables.txt:22504:the other. Cosette’s instinct sought a father, as Jean Valjean’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:22505:instinct sought a child. To meet was to find each other. At the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22506:mysterious moment when their hands touched, they were welded together.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22507:When these two souls perceived each other, they recognized each other
tests/les_miserables.txt:22508:as necessary to each other, and embraced each other closely.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22510:Taking the words in their most comprehensive and absolute sense, we may
tests/les_miserables.txt:22513:caused Jean Valjean to become Cosette’s father after a celestial
tests/les_miserables.txt:22516:And in truth, the mysterious impression produced on Cosette in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22518:hers in the dark was not an illusion, but a reality. The entrance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22519:that man into the destiny of that child had been the advent of God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22521:Moreover, Jean Valjean had chosen his refuge well. There he seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:22522:perfectly secure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22524:The chamber with a dressing-room, which he occupied with Cosette, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:22526:window in the house, no neighbors’ glances were to be feared from
tests/les_miserables.txt:22527:across the way or at the side.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22530:served as a wagon-house for market-gardeners, and no communication
tests/les_miserables.txt:22532:flooring, which had neither traps nor stairs, and which formed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22533:diaphragm of the building, as it were. The first story contained, as we
tests/les_miserables.txt:22534:have said, numerous chambers and several attics, only one of which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:22535:occupied by the old woman who took charge of Jean Valjean’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:22538:It was this old woman, ornamented with the name of the _principal
tests/les_miserables.txt:22539:lodger_, and in reality intrusted with the functions of portress, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:22542:was coming there to live with his little daughter. He had paid her six
tests/les_miserables.txt:22543:months in advance, and had commissioned the old woman to furnish the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22544:chamber and dressing-room, as we have seen. It was this good woman who
tests/les_miserables.txt:22550:Cosette laughed, chattered, and sang from daybreak. Children have their
tests/les_miserables.txt:22553:It sometimes happened that Jean Valjean clasped her tiny red hand, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:22554:cracked with chilblains, and kissed it. The poor child, who was used to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22556:confusion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22558:At times she became serious and stared at her little black gown.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22562:Jean Valjean had undertaken to teach her to read. Sometimes, as he made
tests/les_miserables.txt:22563:the child spell, he remembered that it was with the idea of doing evil
tests/les_miserables.txt:22564:that he had learned to read in prison. This idea had ended in teaching
tests/les_miserables.txt:22565:a child to read. Then the ex-convict smiled with the pensive smile of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22569:was not man, and he became absorbed in reverie. Good thoughts have
tests/les_miserables.txt:22572:To teach Cosette to read, and to let her play, this constituted nearly
tests/les_miserables.txt:22573:the whole of Jean Valjean’s existence. And then he talked of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:22576:She called him _father_, and knew no other name for him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22578:He passed hours in watching her dressing and undressing her doll, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22579:in listening to her prattle. Life, henceforth, appeared to him to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:22581:reproached any one in thought; he saw no reason why he should not live
tests/les_miserables.txt:22582:to be a very old man, now that this child loved him. He saw a whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:22583:future stretching out before him, illuminated by Cosette as by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22584:charming light. The best of us are not exempt from egotistical
tests/les_miserables.txt:22585:thoughts. At times, he reflected with a sort of joy that she would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:22590:it is by no means clear to us that he did not need this encouragement
tests/les_miserables.txt:22592:malice of men and the misery of society under a new aspect—incomplete
tests/les_miserables.txt:22593:aspects, which unfortunately only exhibited one side of the truth, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22594:fate of woman as summed up in Fantine, and public authority as
tests/les_miserables.txt:22598:temporary eclipse, though sure to reappear later on luminous and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22599:triumphant; but, after all, that sacred memory was growing dim. Who
tests/les_miserables.txt:22601:discouraged and of falling once more? He loved and grew strong again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22602:Alas! he walked with no less indecision than Cosette. He protected her,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22603:and she strengthened him. Thanks to him, she could walk through life;
tests/les_miserables.txt:22604:thanks to her, he could continue in virtue. He was that child’s stay,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22606:balances of destiny!
tests/les_miserables.txt:22617:entering churches at nightfall. He liked to go to Saint-Médard, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:22618:is the nearest church. When he did not take Cosette with him, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:22619:remained with the old woman; but the child’s delight was to go out with
tests/les_miserables.txt:22626:The old woman attended to the housekeeping and cooking and went to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22630:very moderate circumstances. Jean Valjean had made no alterations in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22632:leading to Cosette’s dressing-room replaced by a solid door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22634:He still wore his yellow coat, his black breeches, and his old hat. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:22636:kind-hearted women turned back to bestow a sou on him. Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:22637:accepted the sou with a deep bow. It also happened occasionally that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:22638:encountered some poor wretch asking alms; then he looked behind him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22639:make sure that no one was observing him, stealthily approached the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22640:unfortunate man, put a piece of money into his hand, often a silver
tests/les_miserables.txt:22641:coin, and walked rapidly away. This had its disadvantages. He began to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22645:The old _principal lodger_, a cross-looking creature, who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:22646:thoroughly permeated, so far as her neighbors were concerned, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22647:inquisitiveness peculiar to envious persons, scrutinized Jean Valjean a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22648:great deal, without his suspecting the fact. She was a little deaf,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22649:which rendered her talkative. There remained to her from her past, two
tests/les_miserables.txt:22650:teeth,—one above, the other below,—which she was continually knocking
tests/les_miserables.txt:22651:against each other. She had questioned Cosette, who had not been able
tests/les_miserables.txt:22652:to tell her anything, since she knew nothing herself except that she
tests/les_miserables.txt:22653:had come from Montfermeil. One morning, this spy saw Jean Valjean, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:22654:an air which struck the old gossip as peculiar, entering one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22655:uninhabited compartments of the hovel. She followed him with the step
tests/les_miserables.txt:22656:of an old cat, and was able to observe him without being seen, through
tests/les_miserables.txt:22657:a crack in the door, which was directly opposite him. Jean Valjean had
tests/les_miserables.txt:22658:his back turned towards this door, by way of greater security, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:22659:doubt. The old woman saw him fumble in his pocket and draw thence a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22660:case, scissors, and thread; then he began to rip the lining of one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22661:the skirts of his coat, and from the opening he took a bit of yellowish
tests/les_miserables.txt:22662:paper, which he unfolded. The old woman recognized, with terror, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22663:fact that it was a bank-bill for a thousand francs. It was the second
tests/les_miserables.txt:22664:or third only that she had seen in the course of her existence. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:22667:A moment later, Jean Valjean accosted her, and asked her to go and get
tests/les_miserables.txt:22668:this thousand-franc bill changed for him, adding that it was his
tests/les_miserables.txt:22669:quarterly income, which he had received the day before. “Where?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:22670:thought the old woman. “He did not go out until six o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22671:evening, and the government bank certainly is not open at that hour.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:22672:The old woman went to get the bill changed, and mentioned her surmises.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22673:That thousand-franc note, commented on and multiplied, produced a vast
tests/les_miserables.txt:22674:amount of terrified discussion among the gossips of the Rue des Vignes
tests/les_miserables.txt:22675:Saint-Marcel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22677:A few days later, it chanced that Jean Valjean was sawing some wood, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22678:his shirt-sleeves, in the corridor. The old woman was in the chamber,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22679:putting things in order. She was alone. Cosette was occupied in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22680:admiring the wood as it was sawed. The old woman caught sight of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22681:coat hanging on a nail, and examined it. The lining had been sewed up
tests/les_miserables.txt:22682:again. The good woman felt of it carefully, and thought she observed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22683:the skirts and revers thicknesses of paper. More thousand-franc
tests/les_miserables.txt:22686:She also noticed that there were all sorts of things in the pockets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22687:Not only the needles, thread, and scissors which she had seen, but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22688:big pocket-book, a very large knife, and—a suspicious
tests/les_miserables.txt:22689:circumstance—several wigs of various colors. Each pocket of this coat
tests/les_miserables.txt:22690:had the air of being in a manner provided against unexpected accidents.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22692:Thus the inhabitants of the house reached the last days of winter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22700:Near Saint-Médard’s church there was a poor man who was in the habit of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22701:crouching on the brink of a public well which had been condemned, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22702:on whom Jean Valjean was fond of bestowing charity. He never passed
tests/les_miserables.txt:22704:Those who envied this mendicant said that he belonged to the police. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:22705:was an ex-beadle of seventy-five, who was constantly mumbling his
tests/les_miserables.txt:22709:with him, he saw the beggar in his usual place, beneath the lantern
tests/les_miserables.txt:22710:which had just been lighted. The man seemed engaged in prayer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22711:according to his custom, and was much bent over. Jean Valjean stepped
tests/les_miserables.txt:22712:up to him and placed his customary alms in his hand. The mendicant
tests/les_miserables.txt:22714:his head quickly. This movement was like a flash of lightning. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:22716:caught sight, by the light of the street lantern, not of the placid and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22718:face. He experienced the same impression that one would have on finding
tests/les_miserables.txt:22719:one’s self, all of a sudden, face to face, in the dark, with a tiger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22720:He recoiled, terrified, petrified, daring neither to breathe, to speak,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22722:which was enveloped in a rag, and no longer appeared to know that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:22723:was there. At this strange moment, an instinct—possibly the mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:22724:instinct of self-preservation,—restrained Jean Valjean from uttering a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22726:appearance as he had every day. “Bah!” said Jean Valjean, “I am mad! I
tests/les_miserables.txt:22729:He hardly dared to confess, even to himself, that the face which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:22730:thought he had seen was the face of Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22733:questioned the man, in order to force him to raise his head a second
tests/les_miserables.txt:22736:On the following day, at nightfall, he went back. The beggar was at his
tests/les_miserables.txt:22738:him a sou. The beggar raised his head, and replied in a whining voice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22741:Jean Valjean felt completely reassured. He began to laugh. “How the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22742:deuce could I have thought that I saw Javert there?” he thought. “Am I
tests/les_miserables.txt:22745:A few days afterwards,—it might have been at eight o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22747:when he heard the house door open and then shut again. This struck him
tests/les_miserables.txt:22749:except himself, always went to bed at nightfall, so that she might not
tests/les_miserables.txt:22750:burn out her candles. Jean Valjean made a sign to Cosette to be quiet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22751:He heard some one ascending the stairs. It might possibly be the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:22752:woman, who might have fallen ill and have been out to the apothecary’s.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22756:wore stout shoes, and there is nothing which so strongly resembles the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22758:out his candle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22760:He had sent Cosette to bed, saying to her in a low voice, “Get into bed
tests/les_miserables.txt:22763:Jean Valjean remained silent, motionless, with his back towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22764:door, seated on the chair from which he had not stirred, and holding
tests/les_miserables.txt:22769:chamber, he saw a light through the keyhole. This light formed a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:22770:of sinister star in the blackness of the door and the wall. There was
tests/les_miserables.txt:22771:evidently some one there, who was holding a candle in his hand and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22775:sound of footsteps, which seemed to indicate that the person who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:22779:could not close his eyes all night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22782:awakened by the creaking of a door which opened on some attic at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22783:end of the corridor, then he heard the same masculine footstep which
tests/les_miserables.txt:22784:had ascended the stairs on the preceding evening. The step was
tests/les_miserables.txt:22785:approaching. He sprang off the bed and applied his eye to the keyhole,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22786:which was tolerably large, hoping to see the person who had made his
tests/les_miserables.txt:22788:It was a man, in fact, who passed, this time without pausing, in front
tests/les_miserables.txt:22789:of Jean Valjean’s chamber. The corridor was too dark to allow of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22790:person’s face being distinguished; but when the man reached the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22791:staircase, a ray of light from without made it stand out like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22792:silhouette, and Jean Valjean had a complete view of his back. The man
tests/les_miserables.txt:22793:was of lofty stature, clad in a long frock-coat, with a cudgel under
tests/les_miserables.txt:22794:his arm. The formidable neck and shoulders belonged to Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22796:Jean Valjean might have attempted to catch another glimpse of him
tests/les_miserables.txt:22803:When the old woman came to do the work, at seven o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22804:morning, Jean Valjean cast a penetrating glance on her, but he did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:22809:“Possibly Monsieur may have heard some one come in last night?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:22812:At that age, and on that boulevard, eight o’clock in the evening was
tests/les_miserables.txt:22819:“It was a new lodger who has come into the house,” said the old woman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22824:“I don’t know exactly; Dumont, or Daumont, or some name of that sort.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:22830:The old woman gazed at him with her little polecat eyes, and answered:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:22835:Perhaps she had no ulterior meaning. Jean Valjean thought he perceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:22838:When the old woman had taken her departure, he did up a hundred francs
tests/les_miserables.txt:22839:which he had in a cupboard, into a roll, and put it in his pocket. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:22840:spite of all the precautions which he took in this operation so that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:22841:might not be heard rattling silver, a hundred-sou piece escaped from
tests/les_miserables.txt:22844:When darkness came on, he descended and carefully scrutinized both
tests/les_miserables.txt:22846:absolutely deserted. It is true that a person can conceal himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:22866:An observation here becomes necessary, in view of the pages which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22867:reader is about to peruse, and of others which will be met with further
tests/les_miserables.txt:22870:The author of this book, who regrets the necessity of mentioning
tests/les_miserables.txt:22872:transformed since he quitted it. A new city has arisen, which is, after
tests/les_miserables.txt:22874:loves Paris: Paris is his mind’s natal city. In consequence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22875:demolitions and reconstructions, the Paris of his youth, that Paris
tests/les_miserables.txt:22876:which he bore away religiously in his memory, is now a Paris of days
tests/les_miserables.txt:22878:existed. It is possible that when the author conducts his readers to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22879:spot and says, “In such a street there stands such and such a house,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:22880:neither street nor house will any longer exist in that locality.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22881:Readers may verify the facts if they care to take the trouble. For his
tests/les_miserables.txt:22882:own part, he is unacquainted with the new Paris, and he writes with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22883:old Paris before his eyes in an illusion which is precious to him. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:22885:something of that which he beheld when he was in his own country, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22886:that all has not vanished. So long as you go and come in your native
tests/les_miserables.txt:22887:land, you imagine that those streets are a matter of indifference to
tests/les_miserables.txt:22890:the first encountered haphazard; that those houses, which you do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:22891:enter, are useless to you; that the pavements which you tread are
tests/les_miserables.txt:22892:merely stones. Later on, when you are no longer there, you perceive
tests/les_miserables.txt:22894:doors; and that those walls are necessary to you, those trees are well
tests/les_miserables.txt:22895:beloved by you; that you entered those houses which you never entered,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22897:of your soul, in those pavements. All those places which you no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:22898:behold, which you may never behold again, perchance, and whose memory
tests/les_miserables.txt:22899:you have cherished, take on a melancholy charm, recur to your mind with
tests/les_miserables.txt:22900:the melancholy of an apparition, make the holy land visible to you, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22901:are, so to speak, the very form of France, and you love them; and you
tests/les_miserables.txt:22902:call them up as they are, as they were, and you persist in this, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22903:you will submit to no change: for you are attached to the figure of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22904:your fatherland as to the face of your mother.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22907:said, we beg the reader to take note of it, and we continue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22910:streets, taking the most intricate lines which he could devise,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22911:returning on his track at times, to make sure that he was not being
tests/les_miserables.txt:22914:[Illustration: The Black Hunt]
tests/les_miserables.txt:22916:This manœuvre is peculiar to the hunted stag. On soil where an imprint
tests/les_miserables.txt:22917:of the track may be left, this manœuvre possesses, among other
tests/les_miserables.txt:22918:advantages, that of deceiving the huntsmen and the dogs, by throwing
tests/les_miserables.txt:22919:them on the wrong scent. In venery this is called _false
tests/les_miserables.txt:22923:moon, still very close to the horizon, cast great masses of light and
tests/les_miserables.txt:22924:shadow in the streets. Jean Valjean could glide along close to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22925:houses on the dark side, and yet keep watch on the light side. He did
tests/les_miserables.txt:22926:not, perhaps, take sufficiently into consideration the fact that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22927:dark side escaped him. Still, in the deserted lanes which lie near the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22928:Rue Poliveau, he thought he felt certain that no one was following him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22932:nature. Moreover,—and this is a remark to which we shall frequently
tests/les_miserables.txt:22933:have occasion to recur,—she had grown used, without being herself aware
tests/les_miserables.txt:22934:of it, to the peculiarities of this good man and to the freaks of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22939:clinging to the hand of some one greater than himself; he thought he
tests/les_miserables.txt:22941:idea, no plan, no project. He was not even absolutely sure that it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:22946:Like the wild animal chased from its lair, he was seeking a hole in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22947:which he might hide until he could find one where he might dwell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22949:Jean Valjean described many and varied labyrinths in the Mouffetard
tests/les_miserables.txt:22950:quarter, which was already asleep, as though the discipline of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:22951:Middle Ages and the yoke of the curfew still existed; he combined in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22952:various manners, with cunning strategy, the Rue Censier and the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:22953:Copeau, the Rue du Battoir-Saint-Victor and the Rue du Puits l’Ermite.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22954:There are lodging houses in this locality, but he did not even enter
tests/les_miserables.txt:22955:one, finding nothing which suited him. He had no doubt that if any one
tests/les_miserables.txt:22956:had chanced to be upon his track, they would have lost it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22958:As eleven o’clock struck from Saint-Étienne-du-Mont, he was traversing
tests/les_miserables.txt:22959:the Rue de Pontoise, in front of the office of the commissary of
tests/les_miserables.txt:22960:police, situated at No. 14. A few moments later, the instinct of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:22962:distinctly, thanks to the commissary’s lantern, which betrayed them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22963:three men who were following him closely, pass, one after the other,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22965:entered the alley leading to the commissary’s house. The one who
tests/les_miserables.txt:22966:marched at their head struck him as decidedly suspicious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22968:“Come, child,” he said to Cosette; and he made haste to quit the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:22971:He took a circuit, turned into the Passage des Patriarches, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:22972:closed on account of the hour, strode along the Rue de l’Épée-de-Bois
tests/les_miserables.txt:22975:At that time there was a square formed by the intersection of streets,
tests/les_miserables.txt:22979:It is understood, of course, that the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Geneviève is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:22980:old street, and that a posting-chaise does not pass through the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:22981:Postes once in ten years. In the thirteenth century this Rue des Postes
tests/les_miserables.txt:22984:The moon cast a livid light into this open space. Jean Valjean went
tests/les_miserables.txt:22985:into ambush in a doorway, calculating that if the men were still
tests/les_miserables.txt:22986:following him, he could not fail to get a good look at them, as they
tests/les_miserables.txt:22987:traversed this illuminated space.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22989:In point of fact, three minutes had not elapsed when the men made their
tests/les_miserables.txt:22990:appearance. There were four of them now. All were tall, dressed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22991:long, brown coats, with round hats, and huge cudgels in their hands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22994:pronounced them four spectres disguised as bourgeois.
tests/les_miserables.txt:22996:They halted in the middle of the space and formed a group, like men in
tests/les_miserables.txt:22997:consultation. They had an air of indecision. The one who appeared to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:22999:the direction which Jean Valjean had taken; another seemed to indicate
tests/les_miserables.txt:23000:the contrary direction with considerable obstinacy. At the moment when
tests/les_miserables.txt:23001:the first man wheeled round, the moon fell full in his face. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:23002:Valjean recognized Javert perfectly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23010:Uncertainty was at an end for Jean Valjean: fortunately it still lasted
tests/les_miserables.txt:23013:had concealed himself, and went down the Rue des Postes, towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23015:took her in his arms and carried her. There were no passers-by, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23016:street lanterns had not been lighted on account of there being a moon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23018:He redoubled his pace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23020:In a few strides he had reached the Goblet potteries, on the front of
tests/les_miserables.txt:23021:which the moonlight rendered distinctly legible the ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:23022:inscription:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:23024:De Goblet fils c’est ici la fabrique;
tests/les_miserables.txt:23025:Venez choisir des cruches et des brocs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23030:He left behind him the Rue de la Clef, then the Fountain Saint-Victor,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23031:skirted the Jardin des Plantes by the lower streets, and reached the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23037:Tolls were still collected there at that epoch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23039:He presented himself at the toll office and handed over a sou.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23041:“It is two sous,” said the old soldier in charge of the bridge. “You
tests/les_miserables.txt:23042:are carrying a child who can walk. Pay for two.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23046:flight should be an imperceptible slipping away.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23048:A heavy cart was crossing the Seine at the same time as himself, and on
tests/les_miserables.txt:23049:its way, like him, to the right bank. This was of use to him. He could
tests/les_miserables.txt:23050:traverse the bridge in the shadow of the cart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23055:The bridge once crossed, he perceived some timber-yards on his right.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23056:He directed his course thither. In order to reach them, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:23057:necessary to risk himself in a tolerably large unsheltered and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23058:illuminated space. He did not hesitate. Those who were on his track had
tests/les_miserables.txt:23059:evidently lost the scent, and Jean Valjean believed himself to be out
tests/les_miserables.txt:23063:between two timber-yards enclosed in walls. This street was dark and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23064:narrow and seemed made expressly for him. Before entering it he cast a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23065:glance behind him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23067:From the point where he stood he could see the whole extent of the Pont
tests/les_miserables.txt:23072:These shadows had their backs turned to the Jardin des Plantes and were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23077:Jean Valjean shuddered like the wild beast which is recaptured.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23080:stepped on the bridge, and had not caught sight of him while he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:23081:crossing the large illuminated space, holding Cosette by the hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23083:In that case, by plunging into the little street before him, he might
tests/les_miserables.txt:23084:escape, if he could reach the timber-yards, the marshes, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23085:market-gardens, the uninhabited ground which was not built upon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23087:It seemed to him that he might commit himself to that silent little
tests/les_miserables.txt:23096:Three hundred paces further on, he arrived at a point where the street
tests/les_miserables.txt:23097:forked. It separated into two streets, which ran in a slanting line,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23100:Jean Valjean had before him what resembled the two branches of a Y.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23101:Which should he choose? He did not hesitate, but took the one on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23106:Because that to the left ran towards a suburb, that is to say, towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:23107:inhabited regions, and the right branch towards the open country, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:23110:However, they no longer walked very fast. Cosette’s pace retarded Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:23113:He took her up and carried her again. Cosette laid her head on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23116:He turned round from time to time and looked behind him. He took care
tests/les_miserables.txt:23119:nothing; the silence was profound, and he continued his march somewhat
tests/les_miserables.txt:23120:reassured. All at once, on turning round, he thought he perceived in
tests/les_miserables.txt:23121:the portion of the street which he had just passed through, far off in
tests/les_miserables.txt:23122:the obscurity, something which was moving.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23124:He rushed forward precipitately rather than walked, hoping to find some
tests/les_miserables.txt:23125:side-street, to make his escape through it, and thus to break his scent
tests/les_miserables.txt:23126:once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23131:a wall which bordered a transverse street, in which the one he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:23134:Here again, he was obliged to come to a decision; should he go to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23137:He glanced to the right. The fragmentary lane was prolonged between
tests/les_miserables.txt:23138:buildings which were either sheds or barns, then ended at a blind
tests/les_miserables.txt:23139:alley. The extremity of the cul-de-sac was distinctly visible,—a lofty
tests/les_miserables.txt:23142:He glanced to the left. On that side the lane was open, and about two
tests/les_miserables.txt:23143:hundred paces further on, ran into a street of which it was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23147:an effort to reach the street which he saw at the end of the lane, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:23148:perceived a sort of motionless, black statue at the corner of the lane
tests/les_miserables.txt:23149:and the street towards which he was on the point of directing his
tests/les_miserables.txt:23155:Jean Valjean recoiled.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23158:the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and la Râpée, is one of those which recent
tests/les_miserables.txt:23160:disfigurement according to some, and in a transfiguration according to
tests/les_miserables.txt:23162:have been effaced. To-day, there are brand-new, wide streets, arenas,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23163:circuses, hippodromes, railway stations, and a prison, Mazas, there;
tests/les_miserables.txt:23166:Half a century ago, in that ordinary, popular tongue, which is all
tests/les_miserables.txt:23167:compounded of traditions, which persists in calling the Institut _les
tests/les_miserables.txt:23168:Quatre-Nations_, and the Opera-Comique _Feydeau_, the precise spot
tests/les_miserables.txt:23169:whither Jean Valjean had arrived was called _le Petit-Picpus_. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:23170:Porte Saint-Jacques, the Porte Paris, the Barrière des Sergents, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23171:Porcherons, la Galiote, les Célestins, les Capucins, le Mail, la
tests/les_miserables.txt:23172:Bourbe, l’Arbre de Cracovie, la Petite-Pologne—these are the names of
tests/les_miserables.txt:23173:old Paris which survive amid the new. The memory of the populace hovers
tests/les_miserables.txt:23174:over these relics of the past.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23176:Le Petit-Picpus, which, moreover, hardly ever had any existence, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23178:aspect of a Spanish town. The roads were not much paved; the streets
tests/les_miserables.txt:23179:were not much built up. With the exception of the two or three streets,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23180:of which we shall presently speak, all was wall and solitude there. Not
tests/les_miserables.txt:23181:a shop, not a vehicle, hardly a candle lighted here and there in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23182:windows; all lights extinguished after ten o’clock. Gardens, convents,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23183:timber-yards, marshes; occasional lowly dwellings and great walls as
tests/les_miserables.txt:23186:Such was this quarter in the last century. The Revolution snubbed it
tests/les_miserables.txt:23187:soundly. The republican government demolished and cut through it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23189:was disappearing under the erasing process of new buildings. To-day, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:23190:has been utterly blotted out. The Petit-Picpus, of which no existing
tests/les_miserables.txt:23191:plan has preserved a trace, is indicated with sufficient clearness in
tests/les_miserables.txt:23193:Saint-Jacques, opposite the Rue du Plâtre; and at Lyons, by Jean Girin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23194:Rue Mercière, at the sign of Prudence. Petit-Picpus had, as we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:23196:Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine, which spread out in two branches, taking on
tests/les_miserables.txt:23197:the left the name of Little Picpus Street, and on the right the name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:23198:the Rue Polonceau. The two limbs of the Y were connected at the apex as
tests/les_miserables.txt:23199:by a bar; this bar was called Rue Droit-Mur. The Rue Polonceau ended
tests/les_miserables.txt:23200:there; Rue Petit-Picpus passed on, and ascended towards the Lenoir
tests/les_miserables.txt:23201:market. A person coming from the Seine reached the extremity of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:23202:Polonceau, and had on his right the Rue Droit-Mur, turning abruptly at
tests/les_miserables.txt:23204:right a truncated prolongation of the Rue Droit-Mur, which had no issue
tests/les_miserables.txt:23205:and was called the Cul-de-Sac Genrot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23209:As we have just said, on catching sight of that black silhouette
tests/les_miserables.txt:23211:Petit-Picpus, he recoiled. There could be no doubt of it. That phantom
tests/les_miserables.txt:23216:The time for retreating was passed. That which he had perceived in
tests/les_miserables.txt:23218:squad without a doubt. Javert was probably already at the commencement
tests/les_miserables.txt:23220:appearances, was acquainted with this little labyrinth, and had taken
tests/les_miserables.txt:23221:his precautions by sending one of his men to guard the exit. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:23222:surmises, which so closely resembled proofs, whirled suddenly, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23223:handful of dust caught up by an unexpected gust of wind, through Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:23224:Valjean’s mournful brain. He examined the Cul-de-Sac Genrot; there he
tests/les_miserables.txt:23225:was cut off. He examined the Rue Petit-Picpus; there stood a sentinel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23226:He saw that black form standing out in relief against the white
tests/les_miserables.txt:23227:pavement, illuminated by the moon; to advance was to fall into this
tests/les_miserables.txt:23229:Valjean felt himself caught, as in a net, which was slowly contracting;
tests/les_miserables.txt:23238:In order to understand what follows, it is requisite to form an exact
tests/les_miserables.txt:23239:idea of the Droit-Mur lane, and, in particular, of the angle which one
tests/les_miserables.txt:23240:leaves on the left when one emerges from the Rue Polonceau into this
tests/les_miserables.txt:23242:as the Rue Petit-Picpus, by houses of mean aspect; on the left by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23243:solitary building of severe outlines, composed of numerous parts which
tests/les_miserables.txt:23244:grew gradually higher by a story or two as they approached the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:23245:Petit-Picpus side; so that this building, which was very lofty on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23246:Rue Petit-Picpus side, was tolerably low on the side adjoining the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:23247:Polonceau. There, at the angle of which we have spoken, it descended to
tests/les_miserables.txt:23248:such a degree that it consisted of merely a wall. This wall did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:23249:abut directly on the street; it formed a deeply retreating niche,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23250:concealed by its two corners from two observers who might have been,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23251:one in the Rue Polonceau, the other in the Rue Droit-Mur.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23253:Beginning with these angles of the niche, the wall extended along the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23254:Rue Polonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49, and along the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23255:Rue Droit-Mur, where the fragment was much shorter, as far as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23256:gloomy building which we have mentioned and whose gable it intersected,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23258:sombre of aspect; only one window was visible, or, to speak more
tests/les_miserables.txt:23259:correctly, two shutters covered with a sheet of zinc and kept
tests/les_miserables.txt:23260:constantly closed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23262:The state of the places of which we are here giving a description is
tests/les_miserables.txt:23263:rigorously exact, and will certainly awaken a very precise memory in
tests/les_miserables.txt:23266:The niche was entirely filled by a thing which resembled a colossal and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23267:wretched door; it was a vast, formless assemblage of perpendicular
tests/les_miserables.txt:23269:long transverse strips of iron. At one side there was a carriage gate
tests/les_miserables.txt:23270:of the ordinary dimensions, and which had evidently not been cut more
tests/les_miserables.txt:23273:A linden-tree showed its crest above the niche, and the wall was
tests/les_miserables.txt:23274:covered with ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23276:In the imminent peril in which Jean Valjean found himself, this sombre
tests/les_miserables.txt:23277:building had about it a solitary and uninhabited look which tempted
tests/les_miserables.txt:23279:could contrive to get inside it, he might save himself. First he
tests/les_miserables.txt:23280:conceived an idea, then a hope.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23282:In the central portion of the front of this building, on the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:23284:ancient cistern pipes of lead. The various branches of the pipes which
tests/les_miserables.txt:23285:led from one central pipe to all these little basins sketched out a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23286:sort of tree on the front. These ramifications of pipes with their
tests/les_miserables.txt:23287:hundred elbows imitated those old leafless vine-stocks which writhe
tests/les_miserables.txt:23290:This odd espalier, with its branches of lead and iron, was the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:23291:thing that struck Jean Valjean. He seated Cosette with her back against
tests/les_miserables.txt:23292:a stone post, with an injunction to be silent, and ran to the spot
tests/les_miserables.txt:23293:where the conduit touched the pavement. Perhaps there was some way of
tests/les_miserables.txt:23294:climbing up by it and entering the house. But the pipe was dilapidated
tests/les_miserables.txt:23295:and past service, and hardly hung to its fastenings. Moreover, all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23297:the attic windows in the roof. And then, the moon fell full upon that
tests/les_miserables.txt:23298:façade, and the man who was watching at the corner of the street would
tests/les_miserables.txt:23299:have seen Jean Valjean in the act of climbing. And finally, what was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:23303:He gave up all idea of climbing by means of the drain-pipe, and crawled
tests/les_miserables.txt:23304:along the wall to get back into the Rue Polonceau.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23306:When he reached the slant of the wall where he had left Cosette, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:23307:noticed that no one could see him there. As we have just explained, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:23308:was concealed from all eyes, no matter from which direction they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23309:approaching; besides this, he was in the shadow. Finally, there were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23310:two doors; perhaps they might be forced. The wall above which he saw
tests/les_miserables.txt:23312:could, at least, hide himself, although there were as yet no leaves on
tests/les_miserables.txt:23315:Time was passing; he must act quickly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23317:He felt over the carriage door, and immediately recognized the fact
tests/les_miserables.txt:23318:that it was impracticable outside and in.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23320:He approached the other door with more hope; it was frightfully
tests/les_miserables.txt:23321:decrepit; its very immensity rendered it less solid; the planks were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23323:seemed as though it might be possible to pierce this worm-eaten
tests/les_miserables.txt:23327:hinges, cross-bars, lock, nor fissure in the middle; the iron bands
tests/les_miserables.txt:23328:traversed it from side to side without any break. Through the crevices
tests/les_miserables.txt:23329:in the planks he caught a view of unhewn slabs and blocks of stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:23330:roughly cemented together, which passers-by might still have seen there
tests/les_miserables.txt:23331:ten years ago. He was forced to acknowledge with consternation that
tests/les_miserables.txt:23332:this apparent door was simply the wooden decoration of a building
tests/les_miserables.txt:23333:against which it was placed. It was easy to tear off a plank; but then,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23334:one found one’s self face to face with a wall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23343:distance. Jean Valjean risked a glance round the corner of the street.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23344:Seven or eight soldiers, drawn up in a platoon, had just debouched into
tests/les_miserables.txt:23345:the Rue Polonceau. He saw the gleam of their bayonets. They were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23346:advancing towards him; these soldiers, at whose head he distinguished
tests/les_miserables.txt:23347:Javert’s tall figure, advanced slowly and cautiously. They halted
tests/les_miserables.txt:23348:frequently; it was plain that they were searching all the nooks of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23351:This was some patrol that Javert had encountered—there could be no
tests/les_miserables.txt:23354:Javert’s two acolytes were marching in their ranks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23356:At the rate at which they were marching, and in consideration of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23357:halts which they were making, it would take them about a quarter of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:23358:hour to reach the spot where Jean Valjean stood. It was a frightful
tests/les_miserables.txt:23360:precipice which yawned before him for the third time. And the galleys
tests/les_miserables.txt:23364:There was but one thing which was possible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23366:Jean Valjean had this peculiarity, that he carried, as one might say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23367:two beggar’s pouches: in one he kept his saintly thoughts; in the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:23368:the redoubtable talents of a convict. He rummaged in the one or the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23369:other, according to circumstances.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23371:Among his other resources, thanks to his numerous escapes from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23373:the incredible art of crawling up without ladder or climbing-irons, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:23374:sheer muscular force, by leaning on the nape of his neck, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:23376:projections of the stone, in the right angle of a wall, as high as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23377:sixth story, if need be; an art which has rendered so celebrated and so
tests/les_miserables.txt:23378:alarming that corner of the wall of the Conciergerie of Paris by which
tests/les_miserables.txt:23379:Battemolle, condemned to death, made his escape twenty years ago.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23381:Jean Valjean measured with his eyes the wall above which he espied the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23382:linden; it was about eighteen feet in height. The angle which it formed
tests/les_miserables.txt:23385:intended to preserve that too convenient corner from the rubbish of
tests/les_miserables.txt:23386:those dirty creatures called the passers-by. This practice of filling
tests/les_miserables.txt:23387:up corners of the wall is much in use in Paris.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23389:This mass was about five feet in height; the space above the summit of
tests/les_miserables.txt:23390:this mass which it was necessary to climb was not more than fourteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:23393:The wall was surmounted by a flat stone without a coping.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23395:Cosette was the difficulty, for she did not know how to climb a wall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23396:Should he abandon her? Jean Valjean did not once think of that. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:23397:impossible to carry her. A man’s whole strength is required to
tests/les_miserables.txt:23398:successfully carry out these singular ascents. The least burden would
tests/les_miserables.txt:23399:disturb his centre of gravity and pull him downwards.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23402:get a rope at midnight, in the Rue Polonceau? Certainly, if Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:23406:All extreme situations have their lightning flashes which sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:23409:Jean Valjean’s despairing glance fell on the street lantern-post of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23412:At that epoch there were no gas-jets in the streets of Paris. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:23413:nightfall lanterns placed at regular distances were lighted; they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23414:ascended and descended by means of a rope, which traversed the street
tests/les_miserables.txt:23416:over which this rope ran was fastened underneath the lantern in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23417:little iron box, the key to which was kept by the lamp-lighter, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23418:rope itself was protected by a metal case.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23420:Jean Valjean, with the energy of a supreme struggle, crossed the street
tests/les_miserables.txt:23421:at one bound, entered the blind alley, broke the latch of the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:23423:Cosette once more. He had a rope. These gloomy inventors of expedients
tests/les_miserables.txt:23427:night. The lantern in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot was thus naturally extinct,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23428:like the rest; and one could pass directly under it without even
tests/les_miserables.txt:23429:noticing that it was no longer in its place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23431:Nevertheless, the hour, the place, the darkness, Jean Valjean’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:23432:absorption, his singular gestures, his goings and comings, all had
tests/les_miserables.txt:23433:begun to render Cosette uneasy. Any other child than she would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:23434:given vent to loud shrieks long before. She contented herself with
tests/les_miserables.txt:23435:plucking Jean Valjean by the skirt of his coat. They could hear the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23436:sound of the patrol’s approach ever more and more distinctly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23438:“Father,” said she, in a very low voice, “I am afraid. Who is coming
tests/les_miserables.txt:23447:“Say nothing. Don’t interfere with me. If you cry out, if you weep, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23448:Thénardier is lying in wait for you. She is coming to take you back.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23452:and curt precision, the more remarkable at a moment when the patrol and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23453:Javert might come upon him at any moment, he undid his cravat, passed
tests/les_miserables.txt:23454:it round Cosette’s body under the armpits, taking care that it should
tests/les_miserables.txt:23455:not hurt the child, fastened this cravat to one end of the rope, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:23456:means of that knot which seafaring men call a “swallow knot,” took the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23457:other end of the rope in his teeth, pulled off his shoes and stockings,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23458:which he threw over the wall, stepped upon the mass of masonry, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23460:much solidity and certainty as though he had the rounds of a ladder
tests/les_miserables.txt:23465:Valjean’s injunction, and the name of Madame Thénardier, had chilled
tests/les_miserables.txt:23468:All at once she heard Jean Valjean’s voice crying to her, though in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23471:“Put your back against the wall.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23480:Before she had time to recover herself, she was on the top of the wall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23482:Jean Valjean grasped her, put her on his back, took her two tiny hands
tests/les_miserables.txt:23483:in his large left hand, lay down flat on his stomach and crawled along
tests/les_miserables.txt:23484:on top of the wall as far as the cant. As he had guessed, there stood a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23485:building whose roof started from the top of the wooden barricade and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23486:descended to within a very short distance of the ground, with a gentle
tests/les_miserables.txt:23487:slope which grazed the linden-tree. A lucky circumstance, for the wall
tests/les_miserables.txt:23488:was much higher on this side than on the street side. Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:23489:could only see the ground at a great depth below him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23491:He had just reached the slope of the roof, and had not yet left the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23492:crest of the wall, when a violent uproar announced the arrival of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23493:patrol. The thundering voice of Javert was audible:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:23495:“Search the blind alley! The Rue Droit-Mur is guarded! so is the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:23496:Petit-Picpus. I’ll answer for it that he is in the blind alley.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23502:to Cosette, reached the linden-tree, and leaped to the ground. Whether
tests/les_miserables.txt:23503:from terror or courage, Cosette had not breathed a sound, though her
tests/les_miserables.txt:23512:Jean Valjean found himself in a sort of garden which was very vast and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23513:of singular aspect; one of those melancholy gardens which seem made to
tests/les_miserables.txt:23516:forest trees in the corners, and an unshaded space in the centre, where
tests/les_miserables.txt:23517:could be seen a very large, solitary tree, then several fruit-trees,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23518:gnarled and bristling like bushes, beds of vegetables, a melon patch,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23520:there stood stone benches which seemed black with moss. The alleys were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23521:bordered with gloomy and very erect little shrubs. The grass had half
tests/les_miserables.txt:23522:taken possession of them, and a green mould covered the rest.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23525:means of descent, a pile of fagots, and, behind the fagots, directly
tests/les_miserables.txt:23526:against the wall, a stone statue, whose mutilated face was no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:23527:anything more than a shapeless mask which loomed vaguely through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23530:The building was a sort of ruin, where dismantled chambers were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23531:distinguishable, one of which, much encumbered, seemed to serve as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23534:The large building of the Rue Droit-Mur, which had a wing on the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:23535:Petit-Picpus, turned two façades, at right angles, towards this garden.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23536:These interior façades were even more tragic than the exterior. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23538:them. The upper story had scuttles like prisons. One of those façades
tests/les_miserables.txt:23539:cast its shadow on the other, which fell over the garden like an
tests/les_miserables.txt:23540:immense black pall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23543:and darkness. Nevertheless, walls could be confusedly made out, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:23544:intersected as though there were more cultivated land beyond, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23545:low roofs of the Rue Polonceau.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23547:Nothing more wild and solitary than this garden could be imagined.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23548:There was no one in it, which was quite natural in view of the hour;
tests/les_miserables.txt:23552:Jean Valjean’s first care had been to get hold of his shoes and put
tests/les_miserables.txt:23554:fleeing never thinks himself sufficiently hidden. The child, whose
tests/les_miserables.txt:23555:thoughts were still on the Thénardier, shared his instinct for
tests/les_miserables.txt:23556:withdrawing from sight as much as possible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23558:Cosette trembled and pressed close to him. They heard the tumultuous
tests/les_miserables.txt:23559:noise of the patrol searching the blind alley and the streets; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23560:blows of their gun-stocks against the stones; Javert’s appeals to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23561:police spies whom he had posted, and his imprecations mingled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:23562:words which could not be distinguished.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23565:species of stormy roar were becoming more distant. Jean Valjean held
tests/les_miserables.txt:23570:However, the solitude in which he stood was so strangely calm, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:23571:this frightful uproar, close and furious as it was, did not disturb him
tests/les_miserables.txt:23572:by so much as the shadow of a misgiving. It seemed as though those
tests/les_miserables.txt:23573:walls had been built of the deaf stones of which the Scriptures speak.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23575:All at once, in the midst of this profound calm, a fresh sound arose; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23576:sound as celestial, divine, ineffable, ravishing, as the other had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:23577:horrible. It was a hymn which issued from the gloom, a dazzling burst
tests/les_miserables.txt:23578:of prayer and harmony in the obscure and alarming silence of the night;
tests/les_miserables.txt:23579:women’s voices, but voices composed at one and the same time of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23580:pure accents of virgins and the innocent accents of children,—voices
tests/les_miserables.txt:23581:which are not of the earth, and which resemble those that the newborn
tests/les_miserables.txt:23582:infant still hears, and which the dying man hears already. This song
tests/les_miserables.txt:23583:proceeded from the gloomy edifice which towered above the garden. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:23585:that a choir of angels was approaching through the gloom.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23590:them, the man and the child, the penitent and the innocent, felt that
tests/les_miserables.txt:23593:These voices had this strange characteristic, that they did not prevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:23594:the building from seeming to be deserted. It was a supernatural chant
tests/les_miserables.txt:23597:While these voices were singing, Jean Valjean thought of nothing. He no
tests/les_miserables.txt:23599:felt those wings which we all have within us, unfolding.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23601:The song died away. It may have lasted a long time. Jean Valjean could
tests/les_miserables.txt:23602:not have told. Hours of ecstasy are never more than a moment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23605:there was nothing in the garden. That which had menaced, that which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:23607:the crest of the wall, and they gave out a faint, sweet, melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:23616:The night wind had risen, which indicated that it must be between one
tests/les_miserables.txt:23617:and two o’clock in the morning. Poor Cosette said nothing. As she had
tests/les_miserables.txt:23619:had fancied that she was asleep. He bent down and looked at her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23627:“I am very cold,” she replied.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23639:Jean Valjean had already forgotten the means which he had employed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:23645:The child sighed as though a load had been lifted from her breast.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23648:keen every instant. The goodman took off his coat and wrapped it round
tests/les_miserables.txt:23651:“Are you less cold now?” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23656:“Well, wait for me a moment. I will soon be back.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23659:He quitted the ruin and crept along the large building, seeking a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23660:better shelter. He came across doors, but they were closed. There were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23663:Just after he had turned the inner angle of the edifice, he observed
tests/les_miserables.txt:23664:that he was coming to some arched windows, where he perceived a light.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23666:opened on a tolerably vast hall, paved with large flagstones, cut up by
tests/les_miserables.txt:23667:arcades and pillars, where only a tiny light and great shadows were
tests/les_miserables.txt:23668:visible. The light came from a taper which was burning in one corner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23670:Nevertheless, by dint of gazing intently he thought he perceived on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23671:ground something which appeared to be covered with a winding-sheet, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23672:which resembled a human form. This form was lying face downward, flat
tests/les_miserables.txt:23673:on the pavement, with the arms extended in the form of a cross, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23675:serpent which undulated over the floor, that this sinister form had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23676:rope round its neck.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23678:The whole chamber was bathed in that mist of places which are sparely
tests/les_miserables.txt:23679:illuminated, which adds to horror.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23682:spectres had crossed his path in life, he had never beheld anything
tests/les_miserables.txt:23683:more blood-curdling and terrible than that enigmatical form
tests/les_miserables.txt:23684:accomplishing some inexplicable mystery in that gloomy place, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23689:He had the courage to plaster his face to the glass, and to watch
tests/les_miserables.txt:23691:seemed to him a very long time, the outstretched form made no movement.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23692:All at once he felt himself overpowered by an inexpressible terror, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:23697:He reached the ruin all out of breath. His knees were giving way
tests/les_miserables.txt:23700:Where was he? Who could ever have imagined anything like that sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:23701:sepulchre in the midst of Paris! What was this strange house? An
tests/les_miserables.txt:23702:edifice full of nocturnal mystery, calling to souls through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23703:darkness with the voice of angels, and when they came, offering them
tests/les_miserables.txt:23706:actually was an edifice, a house, which bore a number on the street! It
tests/les_miserables.txt:23707:was not a dream! He had to touch the stones to convince himself that
tests/les_miserables.txt:23708:such was the fact.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23711:genuine fever, and all these ideas were clashing together in his brain.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23721:The child had laid her head on a stone and fallen asleep.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23724:gazed at her, he grew calm and regained possession of his freedom of
tests/les_miserables.txt:23727:He clearly perceived this truth, the foundation of his life henceforth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23729:should need nothing except for her, he should fear nothing except for
tests/les_miserables.txt:23730:her. He was not even conscious that he was very cold, since he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:23731:taken off his coat to cover her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23733:Nevertheless, athwart this reverie into which he had fallen he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:23734:heard for some time a peculiar noise. It was like the tinkling of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23735:bell. This sound proceeded from the garden. It could be heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:23736:distinctly though faintly. It resembled the faint, vague music produced
tests/les_miserables.txt:23737:by the bells of cattle at night in the pastures.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23748:Jean Valjean shuddered with the continual tremor of the unhappy. For
tests/les_miserables.txt:23749:them everything is hostile and suspicious. They distrust the day
tests/les_miserables.txt:23750:because it enables people to see them, and the night because it aids in
tests/les_miserables.txt:23751:surprising them. A little while before he had shivered because the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23752:garden was deserted, and now he shivered because there was some one
tests/les_miserables.txt:23755:He fell back from chimerical terrors to real terrors. He said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:23757:departure; that they had, no doubt, left people on the watch in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23758:street; that if this man should discover him in the garden, he would
tests/les_miserables.txt:23759:cry out for help against thieves and deliver him up. He took the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23760:sleeping Cosette gently in his arms and carried her behind a heap of
tests/les_miserables.txt:23761:old furniture, which was out of use, in the most remote corner of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23764:From that point he scrutinized the appearance of the being in the melon
tests/les_miserables.txt:23765:patch. The strange thing about it was, that the sound of the bell
tests/les_miserables.txt:23766:followed each of this man’s movements. When the man approached, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23767:sound approached; when the man retreated, the sound retreated; if he
tests/les_miserables.txt:23768:made any hasty gesture, a tremolo accompanied the gesture; when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:23769:halted, the sound ceased. It appeared evident that the bell was
tests/les_miserables.txt:23770:attached to that man; but what could that signify? Who was this man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:23773:As he put these questions to himself, he touched Cosette’s hands. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:23774:were icy cold.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23776:“Ah! good God!” he cried.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23778:He spoke to her in a low voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:23793:are moments when hideous surmises assail us like a cohort of furies,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23794:and violently force the partitions of our brains. When those we love
tests/les_miserables.txt:23795:are in question, our prudence invents every sort of madness. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:23796:remembered that sleep in the open air on a cold night may be fatal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23802:respiration which seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23804:How was he to warm her back to life? How was he to rouse her? All that
tests/les_miserables.txt:23805:was not connected with this vanished from his thoughts. He rushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:23808:It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23818:taken in his hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:23819:waistcoat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23821:The man’s head was bent down, and he did not see him approaching. In a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23824:Jean Valjean accosted him with the cry:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:23826:“One hundred francs!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23831:“You can earn a hundred francs,” went on Jean Valjean, “if you will
tests/les_miserables.txt:23835:The moon shone full upon Jean Valjean’s terrified countenance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23839:That name, thus pronounced, at that obscure hour, in that unknown spot,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23840:by that strange man, made Jean Valjean start back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23842:He had expected anything but that. The person who thus addressed him
tests/les_miserables.txt:23844:his left knee a leather knee-cap, whence hung a moderately large bell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23845:His face, which was in the shadow, was not distinguishable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23847:However, the goodman had removed his cap, and exclaimed, trembling all
tests/les_miserables.txt:23850:“Ah, good God! How come you here, Father Madeleine? Where did you
tests/les_miserables.txt:23853:are in! You have no cravat; you have no hat; you have no coat! Do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:23854:know, you would have frightened any one who did not know you? No coat!
tests/les_miserables.txt:23859:His words tumbled over each other. The goodman talked with a rustic
tests/les_miserables.txt:23860:volubility, in which there was nothing alarming. All this was uttered
tests/les_miserables.txt:23861:with a mixture of stupefaction and _naïve_ kindliness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23865:“Ah! pardieu, this is too much!” exclaimed the old man. “I am the
tests/les_miserables.txt:23866:person for whom you got the place here, and this house is the one where
tests/les_miserables.txt:23867:you had me placed. What! You don’t recognize me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23876:recognized old Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23878:“Ah!” said Jean Valjean, “so it is you? Yes, I recollect you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23881:“That is very lucky,” said the old man, in a reproachful tone.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23885:“Why, I am covering my melons, of course!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23888:In fact, at the moment when Jean Valjean accosted him, old Fauchelevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:23889:held in his hand the end of a straw mat which he was occupied in
tests/les_miserables.txt:23892:was this operation which had caused him to execute the peculiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:23895:He continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:23898:I were to put my melons into their greatcoats?’ And,” he added, looking
tests/les_miserables.txt:23900:the same! But how do you come here?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23904:the name of Madeleine, thenceforth advanced only with caution. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:23908:“And what is this bell which you wear on your knee?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23911:“This,” replied Fauchelevent, “is so that I may be avoided.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23917:Old Fauchelevent winked with an indescribable air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23921:them warning. When I come, they go.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23933:“Not when you got me the place here as gardener?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23939:“Well, then, this is the Petit-Picpus convent.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23942:Memories recurred to Jean Valjean. Chance, that is to say, Providence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23943:had cast him into precisely that convent in the Quartier Saint-Antoine
tests/les_miserables.txt:23944:where old Fauchelevent, crippled by the fall from his cart, had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:23945:admitted on his recommendation two years previously. He repeated, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:23948:“The Petit-Picpus convent.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23951:“Exactly,” returned old Fauchelevent. “But to come to the point, how
tests/les_miserables.txt:23952:the deuce did you manage to get in here, you, Father Madeleine? No
tests/les_miserables.txt:23957:“You certainly are here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23966:“Ah, good God!” cried Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23969:voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:23971:“Father Fauchelevent, I saved your life.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23974:“I was the first to recall it,” returned Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:23976:“Well, you can do to-day for me that which I did for you in the olden
tests/les_miserables.txt:23980:Fauchelevent took in his aged, trembling, and wrinkled hands Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:23982:incapable of speaking. At length he exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:23984:“Oh! that would be a blessing from the good God, if I could make you
tests/les_miserables.txt:23989:A wonderful joy had transfigured this old man. His countenance seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:23994:“That I will explain to you. You have a chamber?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:23997:“I have an isolated hovel yonder, behind the ruins of the old convent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:23998:in a corner which no one ever looks into. There are three rooms in it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24001:The hut was, in fact, so well hidden behind the ruins, and so cleverly
tests/les_miserables.txt:24002:arranged to prevent it being seen, that Jean Valjean had not perceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:24011:“In the first place, you are not to tell any one what you know about
tests/les_miserables.txt:24012:me. In the second, you are not to try to find out anything more.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24015:“As you please. I know that you can do nothing that is not honest, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:24017:moreover, you it was who placed me here. That concerns you. I am at
tests/les_miserables.txt:24018:your service.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24021:“That is settled then. Now, come with me. We will go and get the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24022:child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24025:“Ah!” said Fauchelevent, “so there is a child?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24033:bed. Jean Valjean had put on his cravat and coat once more; his hat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24034:which he had flung over the wall, had been found and picked up. While
tests/les_miserables.txt:24035:Jean Valjean was putting on his coat, Fauchelevent had removed the bell
tests/les_miserables.txt:24036:and kneecap, which now hung on a nail beside a vintage basket that
tests/les_miserables.txt:24038:resting on a table upon which Fauchelevent had placed a bit of cheese,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24039:black bread, a bottle of wine, and two glasses, and the old man was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24041:Father Madeleine! You did not recognize me immediately; you save
tests/les_miserables.txt:24052:The events of which we have just beheld the reverse side, so to speak,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24053:had come about in the simplest possible manner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24056:arrested him beside Fantine’s death-bed, had escaped from the town jail
tests/les_miserables.txt:24057:of M. sur M., the police had supposed that he had betaken himself to
tests/les_miserables.txt:24060:forest hides a man as does that crowd. Fugitives of every sort know
tests/les_miserables.txt:24061:this. They go to Paris as to an abyss; there are gulfs which save. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:24062:police know it also, and it is in Paris that they seek what they have
tests/les_miserables.txt:24064:summoned to Paris to throw light on their researches. Javert had, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24065:fact, rendered powerful assistance in the recapture of Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24066:Javert’s zeal and intelligence on that occasion had been remarked by M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24067:Chabouillet, secretary of the Prefecture under Comte Anglès. M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24069:inspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:24071:strange for such services, honorable manners.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24073:He no longer thought of Jean Valjean,—the wolf of to-day causes these
tests/les_miserables.txt:24074:dogs who are always on the chase to forget the wolf of yesterday,—when,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24075:in December, 1823, he read a newspaper, he who never read newspapers;
tests/les_miserables.txt:24076:but Javert, a monarchical man, had a desire to know the particulars of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24077:the triumphal entry of the “Prince Generalissimo” into Bayonne. Just as
tests/les_miserables.txt:24078:he was finishing the article, which interested him; a name, the name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24079:Jean Valjean, attracted his attention at the bottom of a page. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:24080:paper announced that the convict Jean Valjean was dead, and published
tests/les_miserables.txt:24081:the fact in such formal terms that Javert did not doubt it. He confined
tests/les_miserables.txt:24085:Some time afterwards, it chanced that a police report was transmitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:24086:from the prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24087:Paris, concerning the abduction of a child, which had taken place,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24088:under peculiar circumstances, as it was said, in the commune of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24091:neighborhood, had been stolen by a stranger; this child answered to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24095:This report came under Javert’s eye and set him to thinking.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24099:respite of three days, for the purpose of going to fetch that
tests/les_miserables.txt:24100:creature’s child. He recalled the fact that Jean Valjean had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:24102:coach for Montfermeil. Some signs had made him suspect at the time that
tests/les_miserables.txt:24103:this was the second occasion of his entering that coach, and that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:24104:had already, on the previous day, made an excursion to the neighborhood
tests/les_miserables.txt:24106:had he been intending to do in that region of Montfermeil? It could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:24108:there. Jean Valjean was going there in search of her. And now this
tests/les_miserables.txt:24109:child had been stolen by a stranger! Who could that stranger be? Could
tests/les_miserables.txt:24111:anything to anybody, took the coach from the _Pewter Platter_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24112:Cul-de-Sac de la Planchette, and made a trip to Montfermeil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24114:He expected to find a great deal of light on the subject there; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:24115:found a great deal of obscurity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24117:For the first few days the Thénardiers had chattered in their rage. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:24118:disappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:24119:immediately obtained numerous versions of the story, which ended in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24120:abduction of a child. Hence the police report. But their first vexation
tests/les_miserables.txt:24121:having passed off, Thénardier, with his wonderful instinct, had very
tests/les_miserables.txt:24122:quickly comprehended that it is never advisable to stir up the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24123:prosecutor of the Crown, and that his complaints with regard to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24124:_abduction_ of Cosette would have as their first result to fix upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:24125:himself, and upon many dark affairs which he had on hand, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24126:glittering eye of justice. The last thing that owls desire is to have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24127:candle brought to them. And in the first place, how explain the fifteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:24128:hundred francs which he had received? He turned squarely round, put a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24130:child_ was mentioned to him. He understood nothing about it; no doubt
tests/les_miserables.txt:24131:he had grumbled for awhile at having that dear little creature “taken
tests/les_miserables.txt:24133:days longer, out of tenderness; but her “grandfather” had come for her
tests/les_miserables.txt:24134:in the most natural way in the world. He added the “grandfather,” which
tests/les_miserables.txt:24135:produced a good effect. This was the story that Javert hit upon when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:24136:arrived at Montfermeil. The grandfather caused Jean Valjean to vanish.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24140:name?” Thénardier replied with simplicity: “He is a wealthy farmer. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:24144:Lambert is a respectable and extremely reassuring name. Thereupon
tests/les_miserables.txt:24147:“Jean Valjean is certainly dead,” said he, “and I am a ninny.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24150:He had again begun to forget this history, when, in the course of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24151:March, 1824, he heard of a singular personage who dwelt in the parish
tests/les_miserables.txt:24152:of Saint-Médard and who had been surnamed “the mendicant who gives
tests/les_miserables.txt:24154:one knew exactly, and who lived alone with a little girl of eight
tests/les_miserables.txt:24155:years, who knew nothing about herself, save that she had come from
tests/les_miserables.txt:24156:Montfermeil. Montfermeil! that name was always coming up, and it made
tests/les_miserables.txt:24157:Javert prick up his ears. An old beggar police spy, an ex-beadle, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:24159:gentleman of property was very shy,—never coming out except in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24160:evening, speaking to no one, except, occasionally to the poor, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24161:never allowing any one to approach him. He wore a horrible old yellow
tests/les_miserables.txt:24162:frock-coat, which was worth many millions, being all wadded with
tests/les_miserables.txt:24163:bank-bills. This piqued Javert’s curiosity in a decided manner. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:24164:order to get a close look at this fantastic gentleman without alarming
tests/les_miserables.txt:24165:him, he borrowed the beadle’s outfit for a day, and the place where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24166:old spy was in the habit of crouching every evening, whining orisons
tests/les_miserables.txt:24167:through his nose, and playing the spy under cover of prayer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24169:“The suspected individual” did indeed approach Javert thus disguised,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24171:shock which Jean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was equal to
tests/les_miserables.txt:24172:the one received by Javert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24175:official; Javert cherished very grave doubts; and when in doubt,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24176:Javert, the man of scruples, never laid a finger on any one’s collar.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24179:talking, which was no difficult matter. The old woman confirmed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24180:fact regarding the coat lined with millions, and narrated to him the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24181:episode of the thousand-franc bill. She had seen it! She had handled
tests/les_miserables.txt:24183:came and listened at the mysterious lodger’s door, hoping to catch the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24184:sound of his voice, but Jean Valjean saw his candle through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24187:On the following day Jean Valjean decamped; but the noise made by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24188:fall of the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman, who, hearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:24189:the rattling of coin, suspected that he might be intending to leave,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24190:and made haste to warn Javert. At night, when Jean Valjean came out,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24194:Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture, but he had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:24196:his secret, and he had kept it for three reasons: in the first place,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24197:because the slightest indiscretion might put Jean Valjean on the alert;
tests/les_miserables.txt:24198:next, because, to lay hands on an ex-convict who had made his escape
tests/les_miserables.txt:24199:and was reputed dead, on a criminal whom justice had formerly classed
tests/les_miserables.txt:24200:forever as _among malefactors of the most dangerous sort_, was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24201:magnificent success which the old members of the Parisian police would
tests/les_miserables.txt:24202:assuredly not leave to a newcomer like Javert, and he was afraid of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24203:being deprived of his convict; and lastly, because Javert, being an
tests/les_miserables.txt:24205:successes which are talked of long in advance and have had the bloom
tests/les_miserables.txt:24206:brushed off. He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24209:Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree, then from corner to
tests/les_miserables.txt:24210:corner of the street, and had not lost sight of him for a single
tests/les_miserables.txt:24212:the most secure Javert’s eye had been on him. Why had not Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:24213:arrested Jean Valjean? Because he was still in doubt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24215:It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not precisely
tests/les_miserables.txt:24217:denounced by the newspapers, had echoed even as far as the Chambers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24218:and had rendered the Prefecture timid. Interference with individual
tests/les_miserables.txt:24219:liberty was a grave matter. The police agents were afraid of making a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24220:mistake; the prefect laid the blame on them; a mistake meant dismissal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24221:The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24222:reproduced by twenty newspapers, would have caused in Paris:
tests/les_miserables.txt:24223:“Yesterday, an aged grandfather, with white hair, a respectable and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24224:well-to-do gentleman, who was walking with his grandchild, aged eight,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24225:was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an
tests/les_miserables.txt:24226:escaped convict!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24229:Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own;
tests/les_miserables.txt:24230:injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24231:prefect. He was really in doubt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24233:Jean Valjean turned his back on him and walked in the dark.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24236:being forced to flee by night, to seek a chance refuge in Paris for
tests/les_miserables.txt:24237:Cosette and himself, the necessity of regulating his pace to the pace
tests/les_miserables.txt:24238:of the child—all this, without his being aware of it, had altered Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:24239:Valjean’s walk, and impressed on his bearing such senility, that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24240:police themselves, incarnate in the person of Javert, might, and did in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24241:fact, make a mistake. The impossibility of approaching too close, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:24242:costume of an _émigré_ preceptor, the declaration of Thénardier which
tests/les_miserables.txt:24244:prison, added still further to the uncertainty which gathered thick in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24247:For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for his
tests/les_miserables.txt:24249:good, honest old fellow living on his income, he was probably some
tests/les_miserables.txt:24250:merry blade deeply and cunningly implicated in the obscure web of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24251:Parisian misdeeds, some chief of a dangerous band, who gave alms to
tests/les_miserables.txt:24252:conceal his other talents, which was an old dodge. He had trusty
tests/les_miserables.txt:24253:fellows, accomplices’ retreats in case of emergencies, in which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:24254:would, no doubt, take refuge. All these turns which he was making
tests/les_miserables.txt:24255:through the streets seemed to indicate that he was not a simple and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24257:laid the golden eggs.” Where was the inconvenience in waiting? Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:24258:was very sure that he would not escape.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24260:Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind, putting to
tests/les_miserables.txt:24261:himself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24264:brilliant light thrown from a dram-shop, he decidedly recognized Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:24268:mother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24271:As soon as he had positively recognized Jean Valjean, the formidable
tests/les_miserables.txt:24272:convict, he perceived that there were only three of them, and he asked
tests/les_miserables.txt:24273:for reinforcements at the police station of the Rue de Pontoise. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:24274:puts on gloves before grasping a thorn cudgel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24276:This delay and the halt at the Carrefour Rollin to consult with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:24277:agents came near causing him to lose the trail. He speedily divined,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24279:pursuers and himself. He bent his head and reflected like a blood-hound
tests/les_miserables.txt:24281:scent. Javert, with his powerful rectitude of instinct, went straight
tests/les_miserables.txt:24283:with the information which he required: “Have you seen a man with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24285:Javert reached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24288:remembered the Cul-de-Sac Genrot arranged there like a trap, and of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24289:sole exit of the Rue Droit-Mur into the Rue Petit-Picpus. _He made sure
tests/les_miserables.txt:24290:of his back burrows_, as huntsmen say; he hastily despatched one of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:24291:agents, by a roundabout way, to guard that issue. A patrol which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24293:on it, and caused it to accompany him. In such games soldiers are aces.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24294:Moreover, the principle is, that in order to get the best of a wild
tests/les_miserables.txt:24295:boar, one must employ the science of venery and plenty of dogs. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:24296:combinations having been effected, feeling that Jean Valjean was caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:24298:himself, Javert, in the rear, he took a pinch of snuff.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24300:Then he began the game. He experienced one ecstatic and infernal
tests/les_miserables.txt:24305:spider which allows the fly to flutter, and of the cat which lets the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24306:mouse run. Claws and talons possess a monstrous sensuality,—the obscure
tests/les_miserables.txt:24307:movements of the creature imprisoned in their pincers. What a delight
tests/les_miserables.txt:24311:knotted. He was sure of success; all he had to do now was to close his
tests/les_miserables.txt:24314:Accompanied as he was, the very idea of resistance was impossible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24315:however vigorous, energetic, and desperate Jean Valjean might be.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24319:Javert advanced slowly, sounding, searching on his way all the nooks of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24320:the street like so many pockets of thieves.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24322:When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24324:His exasperation can be imagined.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24326:He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus;
tests/les_miserables.txt:24331:say, he escapes although he has the pack on his very heels, and then
tests/les_miserables.txt:24333:Desprez halt short. In a discomfiture of this sort, Artonge exclaims,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24334:“It was not a stag, but a sorcerer.” Javert would have liked to utter
tests/les_miserables.txt:24335:the same cry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24339:It is certain that Napoleon made mistakes during the war with Russia,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24340:that Alexander committed blunders in the war in India, that Cæsar made
tests/les_miserables.txt:24341:mistakes in the war in Africa, that Cyrus was at fault in the war in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24342:Scythia, and that Javert blundered in this campaign against Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:24343:Valjean. He was wrong, perhaps, in hesitating in his recognition of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24344:exconvict. The first glance should have sufficed him. He was wrong in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24346:in not arresting him when he positively recognized him in the Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:24347:Pontoise. He was wrong in taking counsel with his auxiliaries in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24348:full light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin. Advice is certainly
tests/les_miserables.txt:24350:who deserve confidence; but the hunter cannot be too cautious when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:24351:is chasing uneasy animals like the wolf and the convict. Javert, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:24352:taking too much thought as to how he should set the bloodhounds of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24353:pack on the trail, alarmed the beast by giving him wind of the dart,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24355:picked up the scent again on the bridge of Austerlitz, he played that
tests/les_miserables.txt:24356:formidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24358:could play at the game of the mouse and the lion. At the same time, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:24359:reckoned himself as too weak, when he judged it necessary to obtain
tests/les_miserables.txt:24360:reinforcement. Fatal precaution, waste of precious time! Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:24361:committed all these blunders, and nonetheless was one of the cleverest
tests/les_miserables.txt:24362:and most correct spies that ever existed. He was, in the full force of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24363:the term, what is called in venery a _knowing dog_. But what is there
tests/les_miserables.txt:24364:that is perfect?
tests/les_miserables.txt:24366:Great strategists have their eclipses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24368:The greatest follies are often composed, like the largest ropes, of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24369:multitude of strands. Take the cable thread by thread, take all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24370:petty determining motives separately, and you can break them one after
tests/les_miserables.txt:24373:Marcian on the east and Valentinian on the west; it is Hannibal
tests/les_miserables.txt:24374:tarrying at Capua; it is Danton falling asleep at Arcis-sur-Aube.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24377:had escaped him, Javert did not lose his head. Sure that the convict
tests/les_miserables.txt:24378:who had broken his ban could not be far off, he established sentinels,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24379:he organized traps and ambuscades, and beat the quarter all that night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24381:rope had been cut. A precious sign which, however, led him astray,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24382:since it caused him to turn all his researches in the direction of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24383:Cul-de-Sac Genrot. In this blind alley there were tolerably low walls
tests/les_miserables.txt:24384:which abutted on gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24385:waste land. Jean Valjean evidently must have fled in that direction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24386:The fact is, that had he penetrated a little further in the Cul-de-Sac
tests/les_miserables.txt:24388:explored these gardens and these waste stretches as though he had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:24392:the Prefecture of Police, as much ashamed as a police spy who had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:24393:captured by a robber might have been.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24406:Nothing, half a century ago, more resembled every other carriage gate
tests/les_miserables.txt:24407:than the carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus. This entrance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24408:which usually stood ajar in the most inviting fashion, permitted a view
tests/les_miserables.txt:24409:of two things, neither of which have anything very funereal about
tests/les_miserables.txt:24410:them,—a courtyard surrounded by walls hung with vines, and the face of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24411:a lounging porter. Above the wall, at the bottom of the court, tall
tests/les_miserables.txt:24412:trees were visible. When a ray of sunlight enlivened the courtyard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24413:when a glass of wine cheered up the porter, it was difficult to pass
tests/les_miserables.txt:24414:Number 62 Little Picpus Street without carrying away a smiling
tests/les_miserables.txt:24415:impression of it. Nevertheless, it was a sombre place of which one had
tests/les_miserables.txt:24420:If one succeeded in passing the porter, which was not easy,—which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24422:which it was necessary to know,—if, the porter once passed, one entered
tests/les_miserables.txt:24423:a little vestibule on the right, on which opened a staircase shut in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24424:between two walls and so narrow that only one person could ascend it at
tests/les_miserables.txt:24426:canary yellow, with a dado of chocolate which clothed this staircase,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24427:if one ventured to ascend it, one crossed a first landing, then a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24428:second, and arrived on the first story at a corridor where the yellow
tests/les_miserables.txt:24429:wash and the chocolate-hued plinth pursued one with a peaceable
tests/les_miserables.txt:24430:persistency. Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautiful
tests/les_miserables.txt:24431:windows. The corridor took a turn and became dark. If one doubled this
tests/les_miserables.txt:24432:cape, one arrived a few paces further on, in front of a door which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24433:all the more mysterious because it was not fastened. If one opened it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24434:one found one’s self in a little chamber about six feet square, tiled,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24435:well-scrubbed, clean, cold, and hung with nankin paper with green
tests/les_miserables.txt:24437:large window, with tiny panes, on the left, which usurped the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:24440:chamber was not furnished; there was not even a chair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24442:One looked again, and beheld on the wall facing the door a quadrangular
tests/les_miserables.txt:24443:hole, about a foot square, with a grating of interlacing iron bars,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24444:black, knotted, solid, which formed squares—I had almost said meshes—of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24445:less than an inch and a half in diagonal length. The little green
tests/les_miserables.txt:24446:flowers of the nankin paper ran in a calm and orderly manner to those
tests/les_miserables.txt:24447:iron bars, without being startled or thrown into confusion by their
tests/les_miserables.txt:24448:funereal contact. Supposing that a living being had been so wonderfully
tests/les_miserables.txt:24449:thin as to essay an entrance or an exit through the square hole, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:24452:mind. This seems to have occurred to them, for it had been re-enforced
tests/les_miserables.txt:24454:pierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24455:strainer. At the bottom of this plate, an aperture had been pierced
tests/les_miserables.txt:24456:exactly similar to the orifice of a letter box. A bit of tape attached
tests/les_miserables.txt:24459:If the tape was pulled, a bell rang, and one heard a voice very near at
tests/les_miserables.txt:24460:hand, which made one start.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24462:“Who is there?” the voice demanded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24464:It was a woman’s voice, a gentle voice, so gentle that it was mournful.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24466:Here, again, there was a magical word which it was necessary to know.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24467:If one did not know it, the voice ceased, the wall became silent once
tests/les_miserables.txt:24468:more, as though the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had been on
tests/les_miserables.txt:24471:If one knew the password, the voice resumed, “Enter on the right.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24474:One then perceived on the right, facing the window, a glass door
tests/les_miserables.txt:24475:surmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray. On raising the latch and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24476:crossing the threshold, one experienced precisely the same impression
tests/les_miserables.txt:24478:grating is lowered and the chandelier is lighted. One was, in fact, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24479:a sort of theatre-box, narrow, furnished with two old chairs, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24480:much-frayed straw matting, sparely illuminated by the vague light from
tests/les_miserables.txt:24482:upon, bearing a tablet of black wood. This box was grated, only the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24484:monstrous lattice of iron bars, hideously interlaced and riveted to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24485:wall by enormous fastenings which resembled clenched fists.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24488:cellar-like half-twilight, one tried to pass the grating, but got no
tests/les_miserables.txt:24489:further than six inches beyond it. There he encountered a barrier of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24490:black shutters, re-enforced and fortified with transverse beams of wood
tests/les_miserables.txt:24493:were always closed. At the expiration of a few moments one heard a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24494:voice proceeding from behind these shutters, and saying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:24499:It was a beloved, sometimes an adored, voice. No one was visible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24501:spirit which had been evoked, that was speaking to you across the walls
tests/les_miserables.txt:24504:If one chanced to be within certain prescribed and very rare
tests/les_miserables.txt:24505:conditions, the slat of one of the shutters opened opposite you; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24506:evoked spirit became an apparition. Behind the grating, behind the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24507:shutter, one perceived so far as the grating permitted sight, a head,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24508:of which only the mouth and the chin were visible; the rest was covered
tests/les_miserables.txt:24509:with a black veil. One caught a glimpse of a black guimpe, and a form
tests/les_miserables.txt:24510:that was barely defined, covered with a black shroud. That head spoke
tests/les_miserables.txt:24513:The light which came from behind you was adjusted in such a manner that
tests/les_miserables.txt:24514:you saw her in the white, and she saw you in the black. This light was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24515:symbolical.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24517:Nevertheless, your eyes plunged eagerly through that opening which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24518:made in that place shut off from all glances. A profound vagueness
tests/les_miserables.txt:24519:enveloped that form clad in mourning. Your eyes searched that
tests/les_miserables.txt:24521:At the expiration of a very short time you discovered that you could
tests/les_miserables.txt:24523:mist mingled with a vapor from the tomb, a sort of terrible peace, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24524:silence from which you could gather nothing, not even sighs, a gloom in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24525:which you could distinguish nothing, not even phantoms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24527:What you beheld was the interior of a cloister.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24529:It was the interior of that severe and gloomy edifice which was called
tests/les_miserables.txt:24531:which you stood was the parlor. The first voice which had addressed you
tests/les_miserables.txt:24533:other side of the wall, near the square opening, screened by the iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:24535:The obscurity which bathed the grated box arose from the fact that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24536:parlor, which had a window on the side of the world, had none on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24537:side of the convent. Profane eyes must see nothing of that sacred
tests/les_miserables.txt:24538:place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24542:most strictly walled of all convents, we shall endeavor to make our way
tests/les_miserables.txt:24544:the proper bounds, things which story-tellers have never seen, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24545:have, therefore, never described.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24553:This convent, which in 1824 had already existed for many a long year in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24554:the Rue Petit-Picpus, was a community of Bernardines of the obedience
tests/les_miserables.txt:24557:These Bernardines were attached, in consequence, not to Clairvaux, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:24558:the Bernardine monks, but to Cîteaux, like the Benedictine monks. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:24559:other words, they were the subjects, not of Saint Bernard, but of Saint
tests/les_miserables.txt:24563:Verga founded in 1425 a congregation of Bernardines-Benedictines, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:24564:Salamanca for the head of the order, and Alcala as the branch
tests/les_miserables.txt:24567:This congregation had sent out branches throughout all the Catholic
tests/les_miserables.txt:24568:countries of Europe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24570:There is nothing unusual in the Latin Church in these grafts of one
tests/les_miserables.txt:24571:order on another. To mention only a single order of Saint-Benoît, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:24572:is here in question: there are attached to this order, without counting
tests/les_miserables.txt:24573:the obedience of Martin Verga, four congregations,—two in Italy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24574:Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine of Padua; two in France, Cluny and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24579:Robert, Abbé de Molesme, in the diocese of Langres, in 1098. Now it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24580:in 529 that the devil, having retired to the desert of Subiaco—he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24581:old—had he turned hermit?—was chased from the ancient temple of Apollo,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24586:Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga. They are clothed in black,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24587:with a guimpe, which, in accordance with the express command of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24588:Saint-Benoît, mounts to the chin. A robe of serge with large sleeves, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24589:large woollen veil, the guimpe which mounts to the chin cut square on
tests/les_miserables.txt:24590:the breast, the band which descends over their brow to their eyes,—this
tests/les_miserables.txt:24591:is their dress. All is black except the band, which is white. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:24592:novices wear the same habit, but all in white. The professed nuns also
tests/les_miserables.txt:24595:The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga practise the Perpetual
tests/les_miserables.txt:24596:Adoration, like the Benedictines called Ladies of the Holy Sacrament,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24597:who, at the beginning of this century, had two houses in Paris,—one at
tests/les_miserables.txt:24599:Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus, of whom we are speaking,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24600:were a totally different order from the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24601:cloistered in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Geneviève and at the Temple. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:24602:were numerous differences in their rule; there were some in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:24603:costume. The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus wore the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24604:black guimpe, and the Benedictines of the Holy Sacrament and of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:24606:breasts, a Holy Sacrament about three inches long, in silver gilt or
tests/les_miserables.txt:24607:gilded copper. The nuns of the Petit-Picpus did not wear this Holy
tests/les_miserables.txt:24608:Sacrament. The Perpetual Adoration, which was common to the house of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24609:the Petit-Picpus and to the house of the Temple, leaves those two
tests/les_miserables.txt:24610:orders perfectly distinct. Their only resemblance lies in this practice
tests/les_miserables.txt:24611:of the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament and the Bernardines of Martin
tests/les_miserables.txt:24613:glorification of all the mysteries relating to the infancy, the life,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24614:and death of Jesus Christ and the Virgin, between the two orders, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:24615:were, nevertheless, widely separated, and on occasion even hostile. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:24616:Oratory of Italy, established at Florence by Philip de Neri, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24617:Oratory of France, established by Pierre de Bérulle. The Oratory of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24618:France claimed the precedence, since Philip de Neri was only a saint,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24619:while Bérulle was a cardinal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24623:The Bernardines-Benedictines of this obedience fast all the year round,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24624:abstain from meat, fast in Lent and on many other days which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:24625:peculiar to them, rise from their first sleep, from one to three
tests/les_miserables.txt:24626:o’clock in the morning, to read their breviary and chant matins, sleep
tests/les_miserables.txt:24628:bath, never light a fire, scourge themselves every Friday, observe the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24629:rule of silence, speak to each other only during the recreation hours,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24630:which are very brief, and wear drugget chemises for six months in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24631:year, from September 14th, which is the Exaltation of the Holy Cross,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24632:until Easter. These six months are a modification: the rule says all
tests/les_miserables.txt:24633:the year, but this drugget chemise, intolerable in the heat of summer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24634:produced fevers and nervous spasms. The use of it had to be restricted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24635:Even with this palliation, when the nuns put on this chemise on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24637:Obedience, poverty, chastity, perseverance in their seclusion,—these
tests/les_miserables.txt:24638:are their vows, which the rule greatly aggravates.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24640:The prioress is elected for three years by the mothers, who are called
tests/les_miserables.txt:24641:_mères vocales_ because they have a voice in the chapter. A prioress
tests/les_miserables.txt:24642:can only be re-elected twice, which fixes the longest possible reign of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24645:They never see the officiating priest, who is always hidden from them
tests/les_miserables.txt:24646:by a serge curtain nine feet in height. During the sermon, when the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24647:preacher is in the chapel, they drop their veils over their faces. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:24649:heads bowed. One man only is allowed to enter the convent,—the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24650:archbishop of the diocese.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24654:nuns may be warned to avoid him, a bell is attached to his knee.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24657:canonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation. As at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24658:voice of Christ, _ut voci Christi_, at a gesture, at the first sign,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24659:_ad nutum, ad primum signum_, immediately, with cheerfulness, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:24660:perseverance, with a certain blind obedience, _prompte, hilariter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24661:perseveranter et cæca quadam obedientia_, as the file in the hand of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24663:to write without express permission, _legere vel scribere non
tests/les_miserables.txt:24664:addiscerit sine expressa superioris licentia_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24666:Each one of them in turn makes what they call _reparation_. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:24669:all the crimes committed on earth. For the space of twelve consecutive
tests/les_miserables.txt:24670:hours, from four o’clock in the afternoon till four o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24671:morning, or from four o’clock in the morning until four o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24673:on the stone before the Holy Sacrament, with hands clasped, a rope
tests/les_miserables.txt:24674:around her neck. When her fatigue becomes unendurable, she prostrates
tests/les_miserables.txt:24675:herself flat on her face against the earth, with her arms outstretched
tests/les_miserables.txt:24676:in the form of a cross; this is her only relief. In this attitude she
tests/les_miserables.txt:24679:As this act is performed in front of a post on which burns a candle, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:24680:is called without distinction, _to make reparation_ or _to be at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24682:which contains an idea of torture and abasement.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24684:_To make reparation_ is a function in which the whole soul is absorbed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24686:directly behind her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24689:Sacrament. This station lasts an hour. They relieve each other like
tests/les_miserables.txt:24693:peculiar solemnity, recalling, not the saints and martyrs, but moments
tests/les_miserables.txt:24694:in the life of Jesus Christ: as Mother Nativity, Mother Conception,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24696:interdicted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24700:All their teeth are yellow. No tooth-brush ever entered that convent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24705:not attach themselves to anything. They call everything _our_; thus:
tests/les_miserables.txt:24706:our veil, our chaplet; if they were speaking of their chemise, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:24707:would say _our chemise_. Sometimes they grow attached to some petty
tests/les_miserables.txt:24708:object,—to a book of hours, a relic, a medal that has been blessed. As
tests/les_miserables.txt:24709:soon as they become aware that they are growing attached to this
tests/les_miserables.txt:24710:object, they must give it up. They recall the words of Saint Thérèse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24712:order, “Permit me, mother, to send for a Bible to which I am greatly
tests/les_miserables.txt:24713:attached.” “Ah, you are attached to something! In that case, do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:24717:Every person whatever is forbidden to shut herself up, to have _a place
tests/les_miserables.txt:24718:of her own, a chamber_. They live with their cells open. When they
tests/les_miserables.txt:24719:meet, one says, “Blessed and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24720:altar!” The other responds, “Forever.” The same ceremony when one taps
tests/les_miserables.txt:24721:at the other’s door. Hardly has she touched the door when a soft voice
tests/les_miserables.txt:24723:practices, this becomes mechanical by force of habit; and one sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:24725:sentence, “Praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24729:one whose cell is entered says, “Gratia plena.” It is their way of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24730:saying good day, which is in fact full of grace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24732:At each hour of the day three supplementary strokes sound from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24733:church bell of the convent. At this signal prioress, vocal mothers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24734:professed nuns, lay-sisters, novices, postulants, interrupt what they
tests/les_miserables.txt:24736:in unison if it is five o’clock, for instance, “At five o’clock and at
tests/les_miserables.txt:24737:all hours praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24738:If it is eight o’clock, “At eight o’clock and at all hours!” and so on,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24739:according to the hour.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24741:This custom, the object of which is to break the thread of thought and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24742:to lead it back constantly to God, exists in many communities; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24745:Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga, cloistered fifty years ago at
tests/les_miserables.txt:24746:Petit-Picpus, chant the offices to a solemn psalmody, a pure Gregorian
tests/les_miserables.txt:24747:chant, and always with full voice during the whole course of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24748:office. Everywhere in the missal where an asterisk occurs they pause,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24749:and say in a low voice, “Jesus-Marie-Joseph.” For the office of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24750:dead they adopt a tone so low that the voices of women can hardly
tests/les_miserables.txt:24751:descend to such a depth. The effect produced is striking and tragic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24753:The nuns of the Petit-Picpus had made a vault under their grand altar
tests/les_miserables.txt:24754:for the burial of their community. _The Government_, as they say, does
tests/les_miserables.txt:24755:not permit this vault to receive coffins so they leave the convent when
tests/les_miserables.txt:24756:they die. This is an affliction to them, and causes them consternation
tests/les_miserables.txt:24757:as an infraction of the rules.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24759:They had obtained a mediocre consolation at best,—permission to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:24760:interred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:24761:Vaugirard cemetery, which was made of land which had formerly belonged
tests/les_miserables.txt:24762:to their community.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24764:On Fridays the nuns hear high mass, vespers, and all the offices, as on
tests/les_miserables.txt:24765:Sunday. They scrupulously observe in addition all the little festivals
tests/les_miserables.txt:24766:unknown to people of the world, of which the Church of France was so
tests/les_miserables.txt:24767:prodigal in the olden days, and of which it is still prodigal in Spain
tests/les_miserables.txt:24768:and Italy. Their stations in the chapel are interminable. As for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24769:number and duration of their prayers we can convey no better idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24771:of the postulants are frightful, the prayers of the novices are still
tests/les_miserables.txt:24775:Once a week the chapter assembles: the prioress presides; the vocal
tests/les_miserables.txt:24776:mothers assist. Each sister kneels in turn on the stones, and confesses
tests/les_miserables.txt:24777:aloud, in the presence of all, the faults and sins which she has
tests/les_miserables.txt:24778:committed during the week. The vocal mothers consult after each
tests/les_miserables.txt:24779:confession and inflict the penance aloud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24781:Besides this confession in a loud tone, for which all faults in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24782:least serious are reserved, they have for their venial offences what
tests/les_miserables.txt:24783:they call the _coulpe. To make one’s coulpe_ means to prostrate one’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:24784:self flat on one’s face during the office in front of the prioress
tests/les_miserables.txt:24785:until the latter, who is never called anything but _our mother_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24786:notifies the culprit by a slight tap of her foot against the wood of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24787:her stall that she can rise. The _coulpe_ or _peccavi_, is made for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24789:a few seconds at an office, a false note in church, etc.; this
tests/les_miserables.txt:24790:suffices, and the _coulpe_ is made. The _coulpe_ is entirely
tests/les_miserables.txt:24791:spontaneous; it is the culpable person herself (the word is
tests/les_miserables.txt:24792:etymologically in its place here) who judges herself and inflicts it on
tests/les_miserables.txt:24793:herself. On festival days and Sundays four mother precentors intone the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24794:offices before a large reading-desk with four places. One day one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24795:the mother precentors intoned a psalm beginning with _Ecce_, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24796:instead of _Ecce_ she uttered aloud the three notes _do si sol_; for
tests/les_miserables.txt:24797:this piece of absent-mindedness she underwent a _coulpe_ which lasted
tests/les_miserables.txt:24798:during the whole service: what rendered the fault enormous was the fact
tests/les_miserables.txt:24799:that the chapter had laughed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24805:The prioress alone can hold communication with strangers. The others
tests/les_miserables.txt:24806:can see only their immediate family, and that very rarely. If, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:24807:chance, an outsider presents herself to see a nun, or one whom she has
tests/les_miserables.txt:24810:the nun comes, and they talk to her through the shutters, which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:24811:opened only for a mother or sister. It is unnecessary to say that
tests/les_miserables.txt:24814:Such is the rule of Saint-Benoît, aggravated by Martin Verga.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24826:One is a postulant for two years at least, often for four; a novice for
tests/les_miserables.txt:24827:four. It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlier
tests/les_miserables.txt:24829:Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga do not admit widows to their
tests/les_miserables.txt:24832:In their cells, they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24833:of which they must never speak.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24835:On the day when a novice makes her profession, she is dressed in her
tests/les_miserables.txt:24836:handsomest attire, she is crowned with white roses, her hair is brushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:24837:until it shines, and curled. Then she prostrates herself; a great black
tests/les_miserables.txt:24838:veil is thrown over her, and the office for the dead is sung. Then the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24839:nuns separate into two files; one file passes close to her, saying in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24840:plaintive accents, “Our sister is dead”; and the other file responds in
tests/les_miserables.txt:24841:a voice of ecstasy, “Our sister is alive in Jesus Christ!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24844:At the epoch when this story takes place, a boarding-school was
tests/les_miserables.txt:24845:attached to the convent—a boarding-school for young girls of noble and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24846:mostly wealthy families, among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle de
tests/les_miserables.txt:24848:illustrious Catholic name of Talbot. These young girls, reared by these
tests/les_miserables.txt:24852:white cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on their
tests/les_miserables.txt:24853:breast. On certain grand festival days, particularly Saint Martha’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:24855:dress themselves as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24857:habit of lending them their black garments. This seemed profane, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:24858:the prioress forbade it. Only the novices were permitted to lend. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:24859:remarkable that these performances, tolerated and encouraged, no doubt,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24860:in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and in order to
tests/les_miserables.txt:24861:give these children a foretaste of the holy habit, were a genuine
tests/les_miserables.txt:24862:happiness and a real recreation for the scholars. They simply amused
tests/les_miserables.txt:24863:themselves with it. _It was new; it gave them a change_. Candid reasons
tests/les_miserables.txt:24864:of childhood, which do not, however, succeed in making us worldlings
tests/les_miserables.txt:24865:comprehend the felicity of holding a holy water sprinkler in one’s hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:24869:The pupils conformed, with the exception of the austerities, to all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24870:practices of the convent. There was a certain young woman who entered
tests/les_miserables.txt:24871:the world, and who after many years of married life had not succeeded
tests/les_miserables.txt:24873:one knocked at her door, “forever!” Like the nuns, the pupils saw their
tests/les_miserables.txt:24875:permission to embrace them. The following illustrates to what a degree
tests/les_miserables.txt:24876:severity on that point was carried. One day a young girl received a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24877:visit from her mother, who was accompanied by a little sister three
tests/les_miserables.txt:24878:years of age. The young girl wept, for she wished greatly to embrace
tests/les_miserables.txt:24879:her sister. Impossible. She begged that, at least, the child might be
tests/les_miserables.txt:24880:permitted to pass her little hand through the bars so that she could
tests/les_miserables.txt:24889:Nonetheless, these young girls filled this grave house with charming
tests/les_miserables.txt:24892:At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister. The recreation
tests/les_miserables.txt:24893:hour struck. A door swung on its hinges. The birds said, “Good; here
tests/les_miserables.txt:24894:come the children!” An irruption of youth inundated that garden
tests/les_miserables.txt:24895:intersected with a cross like a shroud. Radiant faces, white foreheads,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24896:innocent eyes, full of merry light, all sorts of auroras, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:24897:scattered about amid these shadows. After the psalmodies, the bells,
tests/les_miserables.txt:24898:the peals, and knells and offices, the sound of these little girls
tests/les_miserables.txt:24900:of joy was opened, and each one brought her honey. They played, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:24901:called to each other, they formed into groups, they ran about; pretty
tests/les_miserables.txt:24902:little white teeth chattered in the corners; the veils superintended
tests/les_miserables.txt:24903:the laughs from a distance, shades kept watch of the sunbeams, but what
tests/les_miserables.txt:24905:had their moment of dazzling brilliancy. They looked on, vaguely
tests/les_miserables.txt:24906:blanched with the reflection of so much joy at this sweet swarming of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24908:mourning. The young girls frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:24909:gaze of impeccability does not embarrass innocence. Thanks to these
tests/les_miserables.txt:24910:children, there was, among so many austere hours, one hour of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24911:ingenuousness. The little ones skipped about; the elder ones danced. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:24912:this cloister play was mingled with heaven. Nothing is so delightful
tests/les_miserables.txt:24914:have come thither to laugh with Perrault; and there was in that black
tests/les_miserables.txt:24915:garden, youth, health, noise, cries, giddiness, pleasure, happiness
tests/les_miserables.txt:24916:enough to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ancestresses, those of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24917:the epic as well as those of the fairy-tale, those of the throne as
tests/les_miserables.txt:24918:well as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la Mère-Grand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24920:In that house more than anywhere else, perhaps, arise those children’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:24921:sayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile that is full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24922:thoughtfulness. It was between those four gloomy walls that a child of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24923:five years exclaimed one day: “Mother! one of the big girls has just
tests/les_miserables.txt:24928:It was here, too, that this memorable dialogue took place:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:24930:_A Vocal Mother_. Why are you weeping, my child?
tests/les_miserables.txt:24932:_The child_ (aged six). I told Alix that I knew my French history. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:24937:_The Mother_. How is that, my child?
tests/les_miserables.txt:24952:question that I came across.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24962:paroquet which belonged to a lady boarder:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:24964:“How well bred! it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter just
tests/les_miserables.txt:24968:It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was once
tests/les_miserables.txt:24969:picked up a confession which had been written out in advance, in order
tests/les_miserables.txt:24972:“Father, I accuse myself of having been avaricious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24974:“Father, I accuse myself of having been an adulteress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24976:“Father, I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24979:It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth six
tests/les_miserables.txt:24980:years of age improvised the following tale, which was listened to by
tests/les_miserables.txt:24983:“There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24984:great many flowers. They plucked the flowers and put them in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:24985:pockets. After that they plucked the leaves and put them in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:24986:playthings. There was a wolf in that country; there was a great deal of
tests/les_miserables.txt:24987:forest; and the wolf was in the forest; and he ate the little cocks.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:24992:“There came a blow with a stick.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24994:“It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:24998:“Then a lady put Punchinello in prison.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:25001:It was there that a little abandoned child, a foundling whom the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25002:convent was bringing up out of charity, uttered this sweet and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25004:and she murmured in her corner:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:25009:There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying through
tests/les_miserables.txt:25010:the corridors with her bunch of keys, and whose name was Sister Agatha.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25011:The _big big girls_—those over ten years of age—called her
tests/les_miserables.txt:25012:_Agathocles_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25014:The refectory, a large apartment of an oblong square form, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:25015:received no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25016:garden, was dark and damp, and, as the children say, full of beasts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25017:All the places round about furnished their contingent of insects.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25019:Each of its four corners had received, in the language of the pupils, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25020:special and expressive name. There was Spider corner, Caterpillar
tests/les_miserables.txt:25021:corner, Wood-louse corner, and Cricket corner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25023:Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed. It was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:25024:so cold there as elsewhere. From the refectory the names had passed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25025:the boarding-school, and there served as in the old College Mazarin to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25027:nations according to the corner of the refectory in which she sat at
tests/les_miserables.txt:25028:meals. One day Monseigneur the Archbishop while making his pastoral
tests/les_miserables.txt:25030:the class-room through which he was passing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25032:He inquired of another pupil, a charming brunette with rosy cheeks, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:25044:“She is a cricket.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:25050:“She is a caterpillar.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:25059:Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities. At the beginning of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25060:this century Écouen was one of those strict and graceful places where
tests/les_miserables.txt:25061:young girls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:25062:Écouen, in order to take rank in the procession of the Holy Sacrament,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25063:a distinction was made between virgins and florists. There were also
tests/les_miserables.txt:25064:the “dais” and the “censors,”—the first who held the cords of the dais,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25065:and the others who carried incense before the Holy Sacrament. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:25067:advance. On the morning of that great day it was no rare thing to hear
tests/les_miserables.txt:25072:years, to a “big girl” of sixteen, who took the head of the procession,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25083:Above the door of the refectory this prayer, which was called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25084:_white Paternoster_, and which possessed the property of bearing people
tests/les_miserables.txt:25085:straight to paradise, was inscribed in large black letters:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:25087:“Little white Paternoster, which God made, which God said, which God
tests/les_miserables.txt:25088:placed in paradise. In the evening, when I went to bed, I found three
tests/les_miserables.txt:25093:in which God was born envelopes my body; Saint Margaret’s cross is
tests/les_miserables.txt:25096:John, whence come you?’ ‘I come from _Ave Salus_.’ ‘You have not seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:25098:hanging, his hands nailed, a little cap of white thorns on his head.’
tests/les_miserables.txt:25099:Whoever shall say this thrice at eventide, thrice in the morning, shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:25103:In 1827 this characteristic orison had disappeared from the wall under
tests/les_miserables.txt:25104:a triple coating of daubing paint. At the present time it is finally
tests/les_miserables.txt:25108:A large crucifix fastened to the wall completed the decoration of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:25109:refectory, whose only door, as we think we have mentioned, opened on
tests/les_miserables.txt:25110:the garden. Two narrow tables, each flanked by two wooden benches,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25112:refectory. The walls were white, the tables were black; these two
tests/les_miserables.txt:25113:mourning colors constitute the only variety in convents. The meals were
tests/les_miserables.txt:25114:plain, and the food of the children themselves severe. A single dish of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25115:meat and vegetables combined, or salt fish—such was their luxury. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:25116:meagre fare, which was reserved for the pupils alone, was,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25117:nevertheless, an exception. The children ate in silence, under the eye
tests/les_miserables.txt:25120:time. This silence was seasoned with the lives of the saints, read
tests/les_miserables.txt:25121:aloud from a little pulpit with a desk, which was situated at the foot
tests/les_miserables.txt:25122:of the crucifix. The reader was one of the big girls, in weekly turn.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25123:At regular distances, on the bare tables, there were large, varnished
tests/les_miserables.txt:25124:bowls in which the pupils washed their own silver cups and knives and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25125:forks, and into which they sometimes threw some scrap of tough meat or
tests/les_miserables.txt:25126:spoiled fish; this was punished. These bowls were called _ronds d’eau_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25127:The child who broke the silence “made a cross with her tongue.” Where?
tests/les_miserables.txt:25128:On the ground. She licked the pavement. The dust, that end of all joys,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25129:was charged with the chastisement of those poor little rose-leaves
tests/les_miserables.txt:25130:which had been guilty of chirping.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25132:There was in the convent a book which has never been printed except as
tests/les_miserables.txt:25133:a _unique copy_, and which it is forbidden to read. It is the rule of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25134:Saint-Benoît. An arcanum which no profane eye must penetrate. _Nemo
tests/les_miserables.txt:25135:regulas, seu constitutiones nostras, externis communicabit_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25137:The pupils one day succeeded in getting possession of this book, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25138:set to reading it with avidity, a reading which was often interrupted
tests/les_miserables.txt:25139:by the fear of being caught, which caused them to close the volume
tests/les_miserables.txt:25140:precipitately.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25142:From the great danger thus incurred they derived but a very moderate
tests/les_miserables.txt:25147:fruit-trees. In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25149:sometimes succeeded in picking up a green apple or a spoiled apricot or
tests/les_miserables.txt:25150:an inhabited pear on the sly. I will now cede the privilege of speech
tests/les_miserables.txt:25151:to a letter which lies before me, a letter written five and twenty
tests/les_miserables.txt:25152:years ago by an old pupil, now Madame la Duchesse de ——, one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25156:night one eats them in bed, and when one cannot do that, one eats them
tests/les_miserables.txt:25157:in the closet.” That was one of their greatest luxuries.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25159:Once—it was at the epoch of the visit from the archbishop to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25160:convent—one of the young girls, Mademoiselle Bouchard, who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25161:connected with the Montmorency family, laid a wager that she would ask
tests/les_miserables.txt:25162:for a day’s leave of absence—an enormity in so austere a community. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:25163:wager was accepted, but not one of those who bet believed that she
tests/les_miserables.txt:25164:would do it. When the moment came, as the archbishop was passing in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25165:front of the pupils, Mademoiselle Bouchard, to the indescribable terror
tests/les_miserables.txt:25166:of her companions, stepped out of the ranks, and said, “Monseigneur, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25167:day’s leave of absence.” Mademoiselle Bouchard was tall, blooming, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:25168:the prettiest little rosy face in the world. M. de Quélen smiled and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25169:said, “What, my dear child, a day’s leave of absence! Three days if you
tests/les_miserables.txt:25170:like. I grant you three days.” The prioress could do nothing; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25171:archbishop had spoken. Horror of the convent, but joy of the pupil. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:25172:effect may be imagined.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25174:This stern cloister was not so well walled off, however, but that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25175:life of the passions of the outside world, drama, and even romance, did
tests/les_miserables.txt:25176:not make their way in. To prove this, we will confine ourselves to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25177:recording here and to briefly mentioning a real and incontestable fact,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25178:which, however, bears no reference in itself to, and is not connected
tests/les_miserables.txt:25179:by any thread whatever with the story which we are relating. We mention
tests/les_miserables.txt:25180:the fact for the sake of completing the physiognomy of the convent in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25183:About this time there was in the convent a mysterious person who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25184:not a nun, who was treated with great respect, and who was addressed as
tests/les_miserables.txt:25187:said there lay the arrangements of fortune necessary for a great
tests/les_miserables.txt:25190:This woman, hardly thirty years of age, of dark complexion and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25191:tolerably pretty, had a vague look in her large black eyes. Could she
tests/les_miserables.txt:25194:nostrils were livid and pinched as after yielding up their last sigh.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25195:To touch her hand was like touching snow. She possessed a strange
tests/les_miserables.txt:25196:spectral grace. Wherever she entered, people felt cold. One day a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25201:eternal curiosity of the pupils. In the chapel there was a gallery
tests/les_miserables.txt:25202:called _L’Œil de Bœuf_. It was in this gallery, which had only a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25203:circular bay, an _œil de bœuf_, that Madame Albertine listened to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25204:offices. She always occupied it alone because this gallery, being on
tests/les_miserables.txt:25205:the level of the first story, the preacher or the officiating priest
tests/les_miserables.txt:25206:could be seen, which was interdicted to the nuns. One day the pulpit
tests/les_miserables.txt:25207:was occupied by a young priest of high rank, M. Le Duc de Rohan, peer
tests/les_miserables.txt:25208:of France, officer of the Red Musketeers in 1815 when he was Prince de
tests/les_miserables.txt:25209:Léon, and who died afterward, in 1830, as cardinal and Archbishop of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25210:Besançon. It was the first time that M. de Rohan had preached at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25211:Petit-Picpus convent. Madame Albertine usually preserved perfect
tests/les_miserables.txt:25212:calmness and complete immobility during the sermons and services. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:25213:day, as soon as she caught sight of M. de Rohan, she half rose, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25214:said, in a loud voice, amid the silence of the chapel, “Ah! Auguste!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:25215:The whole community turned their heads in amazement, the preacher
tests/les_miserables.txt:25218:instant across that cold and lifeless face and had then vanished, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25219:the mad woman had become a corpse again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25221:Those two words, however, had set every one in the convent who had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25222:privilege of speech to chattering. How many things were contained in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25225:highest society, since she knew M. de Rohan, and that her own rank
tests/les_miserables.txt:25226:there was of the highest, since she spoke thus familiarly of so great a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25227:lord, and that there existed between them some connection, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25228:relationship, perhaps, but a very close one in any case, since she knew
tests/les_miserables.txt:25232:Two very severe duchesses, Mesdames de Choiseul and de Sérent, often
tests/les_miserables.txt:25233:visited the community, whither they penetrated, no doubt, in virtue of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25234:the privilege _Magnates mulieres_, and caused great consternation in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25235:the boarding-school. When these two old ladies passed by, all the poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:25238:Moreover, M. de Rohan, quite unknown to himself, was an object of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25239:attention to the school-girls. At that epoch he had just been made,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25240:while waiting for the episcopate, vicar-general of the Archbishop of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25241:Paris. It was one of his habits to come tolerably often to celebrate
tests/les_miserables.txt:25242:the offices in the chapel of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus. Not one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25243:the young recluses could see him, because of the serge curtain, but he
tests/les_miserables.txt:25244:had a sweet and rather shrill voice, which they had come to know and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25246:very coquettish, that his handsome brown hair was very well dressed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25247:a roll around his head, and that he had a broad girdle of magnificent
tests/les_miserables.txt:25248:moire, and that his black cassock was of the most elegant cut in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25249:world. He held a great place in all these imaginations of sixteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:25252:Not a sound from without made its way into the convent. But there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25254:event, and the girls who were at school there at the time still recall
tests/les_miserables.txt:25257:It was a flute which was played in the neighborhood. This flute always
tests/les_miserables.txt:25258:played the same air, an air which is very far away nowadays,—“My
tests/les_miserables.txt:25259:Zétulbé, come reign o’er my soul,”—and it was heard two or three times
tests/les_miserables.txt:25260:a day. The young girls passed hours in listening to it, the vocal
tests/les_miserables.txt:25261:mothers were upset by it, brains were busy, punishments descended in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25263:less in love with the unknown musician. Each one dreamed that she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25264:Zétulbé. The sound of the flute proceeded from the direction of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:25265:Droit-Mur; and they would have given anything, compromised everything,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25266:attempted anything for the sake of seeing, of catching a glance, if
tests/les_miserables.txt:25267:only for a second, of the “young man” who played that flute so
tests/les_miserables.txt:25268:deliciously, and who, no doubt, played on all these souls at the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:25269:time. There were some who made their escape by a back door, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25270:ascended to the third story on the Rue Droit-Mur side, in order to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25271:attempt to catch a glimpse through the gaps. Impossible! One even went
tests/les_miserables.txt:25273:handkerchief. Two were still bolder. They found means to climb on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25274:roof, and risked their lives there, and succeeded at last in seeing
tests/les_miserables.txt:25276:who was playing his flute in his attic, in order to pass the time.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25284:In this enclosure of the Petit-Picpus there were three perfectly
tests/les_miserables.txt:25285:distinct buildings,—the Great Convent, inhabited by the nuns, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25286:Boarding-school, where the scholars were lodged; and lastly, what was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25287:called the Little Convent. It was a building with a garden, in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:25288:lived all sorts of aged nuns of various orders, the relics of cloisters
tests/les_miserables.txt:25289:destroyed in the Revolution; a reunion of all the black, gray, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25290:white medleys of all communities and all possible varieties; what might
tests/les_miserables.txt:25291:be called, if such a coupling of words is permissible, a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25292:harlequin convent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25295:exiled women had been accorded permission to come and take shelter
tests/les_miserables.txt:25296:under the wings of the Bernardines-Benedictines. The government paid
tests/les_miserables.txt:25297:them a small pension, the ladies of the Petit-Picpus received them
tests/les_miserables.txt:25298:cordially. It was a singular pell-mell. Each followed her own rule.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25299:Sometimes the pupils of the boarding-school were allowed, as a great
tests/les_miserables.txt:25300:recreation, to pay them a visit; the result is, that all those young
tests/les_miserables.txt:25302:Sainte-Bazile, Mother Sainte-Scolastique, and Mother Jacob.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25305:Sainte-Aure, the only one of her order who had survived. The ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:25306:convent of the ladies of Sainte-Aure occupied, at the beginning of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25307:eighteenth century, this very house of the Petit-Picpus, which belonged
tests/les_miserables.txt:25308:later to the Benedictines of Martin Verga. This holy woman, too poor to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25309:wear the magnificent habit of her order, which was a white robe with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25310:scarlet scapulary, had piously put it on a little manikin, which she
tests/les_miserables.txt:25311:exhibited with complacency and which she bequeathed to the house at her
tests/les_miserables.txt:25315:In addition to these worthy mothers, some old society women had
tests/les_miserables.txt:25319:convent except by the formidable noise which she made when she blew her
tests/les_miserables.txt:25320:nose. The pupils called her Madame Vacarmini (hubbub).
tests/les_miserables.txt:25323:little periodical publication called _l’Intrépide_, asked to be allowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:25324:to enter the convent of the Petit-Picpus as lady resident. The Duc
tests/les_miserables.txt:25325:d’Orléans recommended her. Uproar in the hive; the vocal-mothers were
tests/les_miserables.txt:25326:all in a flutter; Madame de Genlis had made romances. But she declared
tests/les_miserables.txt:25327:that she was the first to detest them, and then, she had reached her
tests/les_miserables.txt:25328:fierce stage of devotion. With the aid of God, and of the Prince, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:25333:When she went away she left her mark in her cell. Madame de Genlis was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25336:the inside of a little cupboard in her cell in which she locked up her
tests/les_miserables.txt:25338:own hand in red ink on yellow paper, and which, in her opinion,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25341:Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis:
tests/les_miserables.txt:25344:Nos et res nostras conservet summa potestas.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25345:Hos versus dicas, ne tu furto tua perdas.15
tests/les_miserables.txt:25348:These verses in sixth century Latin raise the question whether the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:25349:thieves of Calvary were named, as is commonly believed, Dismas and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25350:Gestas, or Dismas and Gesmas. This orthography might have confounded
tests/les_miserables.txt:25351:the pretensions put forward in the last century by the Vicomte de
tests/les_miserables.txt:25352:Gestas, of a descent from the wicked thief. However, the useful virtue
tests/les_miserables.txt:25353:attached to these verses forms an article of faith in the order of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25356:The church of the house, constructed in such a manner as to separate
tests/les_miserables.txt:25357:the Great Convent from the Boarding-school like a veritable
tests/les_miserables.txt:25358:intrenchment, was, of course, common to the Boarding-school, the Great
tests/les_miserables.txt:25359:Convent, and the Little Convent. The public was even admitted by a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:25360:of lazaretto entrance on the street. But all was so arranged, that none
tests/les_miserables.txt:25361:of the inhabitants of the cloister could see a face from the outside
tests/les_miserables.txt:25362:world. Suppose a church whose choir is grasped in a gigantic hand, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25363:folded in such a manner as to form, not, as in ordinary churches, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25364:prolongation behind the altar, but a sort of hall, or obscure cellar,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25365:to the right of the officiating priest; suppose this hall to be shut
tests/les_miserables.txt:25366:off by a curtain seven feet in height, of which we have already spoken;
tests/les_miserables.txt:25367:in the shadow of that curtain, pile up on wooden stalls the nuns in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25368:choir on the left, the school-girls on the right, the lay-sisters and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25369:the novices at the bottom, and you will have some idea of the nuns of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25370:the Petit-Picpus assisting at divine service. That cavern, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25371:called the choir, communicated with the cloister by a lobby. The church
tests/les_miserables.txt:25372:was lighted from the garden. When the nuns were present at services
tests/les_miserables.txt:25373:where their rule enjoined silence, the public was warned of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:25374:presence only by the folding seats of the stalls noisily rising and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25383:During the six years which separate 1819 from 1825, the prioress of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25384:Petit-Picpus was Mademoiselle de Blemeur, whose name, in religion, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25385:Mother Innocente. She came of the family of Marguerite de Blemeur,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25387:been re-elected. She was a woman about sixty years of age, short,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25388:thick, “singing like a cracked pot,” says the letter which we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:25389:already quoted; an excellent woman, moreover, and the only merry one in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25390:the whole convent, and for that reason adored. She was learned,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25391:erudite, wise, competent, curiously proficient in history, crammed with
tests/les_miserables.txt:25392:Latin, stuffed with Greek, full of Hebrew, and more of a Benedictine
tests/les_miserables.txt:25393:monk than a Benedictine nun.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25398:The most esteemed among the vocal mothers were Mother Sainte-Honorine;
tests/les_miserables.txt:25399:the treasurer, Mother Sainte-Gertrude, the chief mistress of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25400:novices; Mother-Saint-Ange, the assistant mistress; Mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:25401:Annonciation, the sacristan; Mother Saint-Augustin, the nurse, the only
tests/les_miserables.txt:25402:one in the convent who was malicious; then Mother Sainte-Mechtilde
tests/les_miserables.txt:25403:(Mademoiselle Gauvain), very young and with a beautiful voice; Mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:25404:des Anges (Mademoiselle Drouet), who had been in the convent of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25405:Filles-Dieu, and in the convent du Trésor, between Gisors and Magny;
tests/les_miserables.txt:25407:(Mademoiselle d’Auverney), Mother Miséricorde (Mademoiselle de
tests/les_miserables.txt:25408:Cifuentes, who could not resist austerities), Mother Compassion
tests/les_miserables.txt:25409:(Mademoiselle de la Miltière, received at the age of sixty in defiance
tests/les_miserables.txt:25410:of the rule, and very wealthy); Mother Providence (Mademoiselle de
tests/les_miserables.txt:25413:sculptor Ceracchi), who went mad; Mother Sainte-Chantal (Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:25416:There was also, among the prettiest of them, a charming girl of three
tests/les_miserables.txt:25417:and twenty, who was from the Isle de Bourbon, a descendant of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25419:called Mother Assumption.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25421:Mother Sainte-Mechtilde, intrusted with the singing and the choir, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25423:complete scale of them, that is to say, seven, from ten to sixteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:25424:years of age, inclusive, of assorted voices and sizes, whom she made
tests/les_miserables.txt:25425:sing standing, drawn up in a line, side by side, according to age, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:25430:Those of the lay-sisters whom the scholars loved most were Sister
tests/les_miserables.txt:25432:her dotage, and Sister Sainte-Michel, whose long nose made them laugh.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25434:All these women were gentle with the children. The nuns were severe
tests/les_miserables.txt:25435:only towards themselves. No fire was lighted except in the school, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25436:the food was choice compared to that in the convent. Moreover, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:25437:lavished a thousand cares on their scholars. Only, when a child passed
tests/les_miserables.txt:25440:This rule of silence had had this effect, that throughout the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:25441:convent, speech had been withdrawn from human creatures, and bestowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:25442:on inanimate objects. Now it was the church-bell which spoke, now it
tests/les_miserables.txt:25443:was the gardener’s bell. A very sonorous bell, placed beside the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25444:portress, and which was audible throughout the house, indicated by its
tests/les_miserables.txt:25445:varied peals, which formed a sort of acoustic telegraph, all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25446:actions of material life which were to be performed, and summoned to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25447:the parlor, in case of need, such or such an inhabitant of the house.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25448:Each person and each thing had its own peal. The prioress had one and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25449:one, the sub-prioress one and two. Six-five announced lessons, so that
tests/les_miserables.txt:25452:“C’est le diable a quatre,”—it’s the very deuce—said the uncharitable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25453:Tennine strokes announced a great event. It was the opening of _the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25454:door of seclusion_, a frightful sheet of iron bristling with bolts
tests/les_miserables.txt:25455:which only turned on its hinges in the presence of the archbishop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25457:With the exception of the archbishop and the gardener, no man entered
tests/les_miserables.txt:25458:the convent, as we have already said. The schoolgirls saw two others:
tests/les_miserables.txt:25459:one, the chaplain, the Abbé Banés, old and ugly, whom they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:25460:permitted to contemplate in the choir, through a grating; the other the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25461:drawing-master, M. Ansiaux, whom the letter, of which we have perused a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25462:few lines, calls _M. Anciot_, and describes as _a frightful old
tests/les_miserables.txt:25463:hunchback_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25465:It will be seen that all these men were carefully chosen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25467:Such was this curious house.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25475:After having sketched its moral face, it will not prove unprofitable to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25476:point out, in a few words, its material configuration. The reader
tests/les_miserables.txt:25479:The convent of the Petit-Picpus-Sainte-Antoine filled almost the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:25480:of the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:25481:Polonceau, the Rue Droit-Mur, the Rue Petit-Picpus, and the unused
tests/les_miserables.txt:25482:lane, called Rue Aumarais on old plans. These four streets surrounded
tests/les_miserables.txt:25483:this trapezium like a moat. The convent was composed of several
tests/les_miserables.txt:25484:buildings and a garden. The principal building, taken in its entirety,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25485:was a juxtaposition of hybrid constructions which, viewed from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25486:bird’s-eye view, outlined, with considerable exactness, a gibbet laid
tests/les_miserables.txt:25487:flat on the ground. The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25488:the fragment of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:25489:Petit-Picpus and the Rue Polonceau; the lesser arm was a lofty, gray,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25490:severe grated façade which faced the Rue Petit-Picpus; the carriage
tests/les_miserables.txt:25491:entrance No. 62 marked its extremity. Towards the centre of this façade
tests/les_miserables.txt:25492:was a low, arched door, whitened with dust and ashes, where the spiders
tests/les_miserables.txt:25493:wove their webs, and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25494:and on rare occasions, when the coffin of a nun left the convent. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:25495:was the public entrance of the church. The elbow of the gibbet was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25496:square hall which was used as the servants’ hall, and which the nuns
tests/les_miserables.txt:25497:called _the buttery_. In the main arm were the cells of the mothers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25498:the sisters, and the novices. In the lesser arm lay the kitchens, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25499:refectory, backed up by the cloisters and the church. Between the door
tests/les_miserables.txt:25500:No. 62 and the corner of the closed Aumarais Lane, was the school,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25501:which was not visible from without. The remainder of the trapezium
tests/les_miserables.txt:25502:formed the garden, which was much lower than the level of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:25503:Polonceau, which caused the walls to be very much higher on the inside
tests/les_miserables.txt:25504:than on the outside. The garden, which was slightly arched, had in its
tests/les_miserables.txt:25505:centre, on the summit of a hillock, a fine pointed and conical
tests/les_miserables.txt:25506:fir-tree, whence ran, as from the peaked boss of a shield, four grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:25507:alleys, and, ranged by twos in between the branchings of these, eight
tests/les_miserables.txt:25508:small ones, so that, if the enclosure had been circular, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25509:geometrical plan of the alleys would have resembled a cross superposed
tests/les_miserables.txt:25511:garden, they were of unequal length. They were bordered with currant
tests/les_miserables.txt:25513:the old convent, which was at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25514:house of the Little Convent, which was at the angle of the Aumarais
tests/les_miserables.txt:25515:Lane. In front of the Little Convent was what was called the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:25516:garden. To this whole, let the reader add a courtyard, all sorts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25518:black line of roofs which bordered the other side of the Rue Polonceau
tests/les_miserables.txt:25519:for its sole perspective and neighborhood, and he will be able to form
tests/les_miserables.txt:25520:for himself a complete image of what the house of the Bernardines of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25521:the Petit-Picpus was forty years ago. This holy house had been built on
tests/les_miserables.txt:25522:the precise site of a famous tennis-ground of the fourteenth to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25523:sixteenth century, which was called the “tennis-ground of the eleven
tests/les_miserables.txt:25527:All these streets, moreover, were more ancient than Paris. These names,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25528:Droit-Mur and Aumarais, are very ancient; the streets which bear them
tests/les_miserables.txt:25529:are very much more ancient still. Aumarais Lane was called Maugout
tests/les_miserables.txt:25530:Lane; the Rue Droit-Mur was called the Rue des Églantiers, for God
tests/les_miserables.txt:25531:opened flowers before man cut stones.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25539:Since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25540:Petit-Picpus was in former times, and since we have ventured to open a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25541:window on that discreet retreat, the reader will permit us one other
tests/les_miserables.txt:25542:little digression, utterly foreign to this book, but characteristic and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25543:useful, since it shows that the cloister even has its original figures.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25545:In the Little Convent there was a centenarian who came from the Abbey
tests/les_miserables.txt:25546:of Fontevrault. She had even been in society before the Revolution. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:25551:was like a city, and that there were streets in the monastery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25553:She talked with a Picard accent which amused the pupils. Every year,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25558:Monseigneur Saint-Procopius, etc., etc.; and thus I give it to you,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25559:father.” And the school-girls would begin to laugh, not in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:25560:sleeves, but under their veils; charming little stifled laughs which
tests/les_miserables.txt:25561:made the vocal mothers frown.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25563:On another occasion, the centenarian was telling stories. She said that
tests/les_miserables.txt:25565:mousquetaires_. It was a century which spoke through her, but it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25566:the eighteenth century. She told about the custom of the four wines,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25567:which existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne. When a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25568:great personage, a marshal of France, a prince, a duke, and a peer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25569:traversed a town in Burgundy or Champagne, the city fathers came out to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25570:harangue him and presented him with four silver gondolas into which
tests/les_miserables.txt:25572:inscription could be read, _monkey wine_; on the second, _lion wine_;
tests/les_miserables.txt:25574:legends express the four stages descended by the drunkard; the first,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25575:intoxication, which enlivens; the second, that which irritates; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25576:third, that which dulls; and the fourth, that which brutalizes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25578:In a cupboard, under lock and key, she kept a mysterious object of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25579:which she thought a great deal. The rule of Fontevrault did not forbid
tests/les_miserables.txt:25580:this. She would not show this object to anyone. She shut herself up,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25581:which her rule allowed her to do, and hid herself, every time that she
tests/les_miserables.txt:25582:desired to contemplate it. If she heard a footstep in the corridor, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:25583:closed the cupboard again as hastily as it was possible with her aged
tests/les_miserables.txt:25584:hands. As soon as it was mentioned to her, she became silent, she who
tests/les_miserables.txt:25585:was so fond of talking. The most curious were baffled by her silence
tests/les_miserables.txt:25586:and the most tenacious by her obstinacy. Thus it furnished a subject of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25587:comment for all those who were unoccupied or bored in the convent. What
tests/les_miserables.txt:25588:could that treasure of the centenarian be, which was so precious and so
tests/les_miserables.txt:25589:secret? Some holy book, no doubt? Some unique chaplet? Some authentic
tests/les_miserables.txt:25590:relic? They lost themselves in conjectures. When the poor old woman
tests/les_miserables.txt:25591:died, they rushed to her cupboard more hastily than was fitting,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25592:perhaps, and opened it. They found the object beneath a triple linen
tests/les_miserables.txt:25593:cloth, like some consecrated paten. It was a Faenza platter
tests/les_miserables.txt:25594:representing little Loves flitting away pursued by apothecary lads
tests/les_miserables.txt:25595:armed with enormous syringes. The chase abounds in grimaces and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25596:comical postures. One of the charming little Loves is already fairly
tests/les_miserables.txt:25598:an effort to fly, but the dancer is laughing with a satanical air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25599:Moral: Love conquered by the colic. This platter, which is very
tests/les_miserables.txt:25600:curious, and which had, possibly, the honor of furnishing Molière with
tests/les_miserables.txt:25601:an idea, was still in existence in September, 1845; it was for sale by
tests/les_miserables.txt:25602:a bric-à-brac merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25604:This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside
tests/les_miserables.txt:25605:_because_, said she, the _parlor is too gloomy_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25613:However, this almost sepulchral parlor, of which we have sought to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25614:convey an idea, is a purely local trait which is not reproduced with
tests/les_miserables.txt:25615:the same severity in other convents. At the convent of the Rue du
tests/les_miserables.txt:25616:Temple, in particular, which belonged, in truth, to another order, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25617:black shutters were replaced by brown curtains, and the parlor itself
tests/les_miserables.txt:25619:white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts of frames, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25620:portrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face, painted bouquets, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25623:It is in that garden of the Temple convent, that stood that famous
tests/les_miserables.txt:25624:chestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25625:France, and which bore the reputation among the good people of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25626:eighteenth century of being _the father of all the chestnut trees of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25629:As we have said, this convent of the Temple was occupied by
tests/les_miserables.txt:25630:Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration, Benedictines quite different
tests/les_miserables.txt:25632:Adoration is not very ancient and does not go back more than two
tests/les_miserables.txt:25633:hundred years. In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on two occasions
tests/les_miserables.txt:25634:a few days apart, in two churches in Paris, at Saint-Sulpice and at
tests/les_miserables.txt:25635:Saint-Jean en Grève, a rare and frightful sacrilege which set the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:25636:town in an uproar. M. the Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain des
tests/les_miserables.txt:25637:Prés ordered a solemn procession of all his clergy, in which the Pope’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:25638:Nuncio officiated. But this expiation did not satisfy two sainted
tests/les_miserables.txt:25639:women, Madame Courtin, Marquise de Boucs, and the Comtesse de
tests/les_miserables.txt:25640:Châteauvieux. This outrage committed on “the most holy sacrament of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25642:and it seemed to them that it could only be extenuated by a “Perpetual
tests/les_miserables.txt:25645:Bar, called of the Holy Sacrament, a Benedictine nun, for the purpose
tests/les_miserables.txt:25649:condition that no woman could be received unless she contributed three
tests/les_miserables.txt:25650:hundred livres income, which amounts to six thousand livres, to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25651:principal.” After the Abbé of Saint-Germain, the king accorded
tests/les_miserables.txt:25652:letters-patent; and all the rest, abbatial charter, and royal letters,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25653:was confirmed in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25655:Such is the origin of the legal consecration of the establishment of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25656:the Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration of the Holy Sacrament at
tests/les_miserables.txt:25657:Paris. Their first convent was “a new building” in the Rue Cassette,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25658:out of the contributions of Mesdames de Boucs and de Châteauvieux.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25660:This order, as it will be seen, was not to be confounded with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25661:Benedictine nuns of Cîteaux. It mounted back to the Abbé of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25663:Sacred Heart go back to the general of the Jesuits, and the sisters of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25664:charity to the general of the Lazarists.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25666:It was also totally different from the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25668:authorized, by a special brief, the Bernardines of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:25669:Petit-Picpus, to practise the Perpetual Adoration like the Benedictine
tests/les_miserables.txt:25670:nuns of the Holy Sacrament. But the two orders remained distinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:25679:At the beginning of the Restoration, the convent of the Petit-Picpus
tests/les_miserables.txt:25680:was in its decay; this forms a part of the general death of the order,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25681:which, after the eighteenth century, has been disappearing like all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25683:needs; but, like everything which the Revolution touched, it will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:25684:transformed, and from being hostile to social progress, it will become
tests/les_miserables.txt:25687:The house of the Petit-Picpus was becoming rapidly depopulated. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:25688:1840, the Little Convent had disappeared, the school had disappeared.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25693:alarms, vocations recoil before it, the order receives no recruits. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:25698:circle of choice was restricted. She was not forty years old. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:25699:proportion as the number diminishes, the fatigue increases, the service
tests/les_miserables.txt:25700:of each becomes more painful; the moment could then be seen drawing
tests/les_miserables.txt:25701:near when there would be but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bear
tests/les_miserables.txt:25702:the heavy rule of Saint-Benoît. The burden is implacable, and remains
tests/les_miserables.txt:25703:the same for the few as for the many. It weighs down, it crushes. Thus
tests/les_miserables.txt:25706:This latter can say, like Julia Alpinula: _“Hic jaceo. Vixi annos
tests/les_miserables.txt:25707:viginti et tres.” _ It is in consequence of this decay that the convent
tests/les_miserables.txt:25708:gave up the education of girls.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25711:entering it, and without introducing the minds which accompany us, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25712:which are listening to our tale, to the profit of some, perchance, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25713:the melancholy history of Jean Valjean. We have penetrated into this
tests/les_miserables.txt:25714:community, full of those old practices which seem so novel to-day. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:25715:is the closed garden, _hortus conclusus_. We have spoken of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:25716:singular place in detail, but with respect, in so far, at least, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:25717:detail and respect are compatible. We do not understand all, but we
tests/les_miserables.txt:25719:de Maistre, who wound up by anointing the executioner, and from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25720:sneer of Voltaire, who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25722:An illogical act on Voltaire’s part, we may remark, by the way; for
tests/les_miserables.txt:25724:those who deny superhuman incarnations, what does the crucifix
tests/les_miserables.txt:25727:In this nineteenth century, the religious idea is undergoing a crisis.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25728:People are unlearning certain things, and they do well, provided that,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25729:while unlearning them they learn this: There is no vacuum in the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:25730:heart. Certain demolitions take place, and it is well that they do, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:25731:on condition that they are followed by reconstructions.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25733:In the meantime, let us study things which are no more. It is necessary
tests/les_miserables.txt:25735:counterfeits of the past assume false names, and gladly call themselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:25736:the future. This spectre, this past, is given to falsifying its own
tests/les_miserables.txt:25738:The past has a visage, superstition, and a mask, hypocrisy. Let us
tests/les_miserables.txt:25739:denounce the visage and let us tear off the mask.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25741:As for convents, they present a complex problem,—a question of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25742:civilization, which condemns them; a question of liberty, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:25743:protects them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25758:Man is the second.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25760:Such being the case, and a convent having happened to be on our road,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25761:it has been our duty to enter it. Why? Because the convent, which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:25762:common to the Orient as well as to the Occident, to antiquity as well
tests/les_miserables.txt:25764:as to Christianity, is one of the optical apparatuses applied by man to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25767:This is not the place for enlarging disproportionately on certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:25769:restrictions, and even our indignations, we must say that every time we
tests/les_miserables.txt:25770:encounter man in the Infinite, either well or ill understood, we feel
tests/les_miserables.txt:25771:ourselves overpowered with respect. There is, in the synagogue, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25772:mosque, in the pagoda, in the wigwam, a hideous side which we execrate,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25773:and a sublime side, which we adore. What a contemplation for the mind,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25783:From the point of view of history, of reason, and of truth, monasticism
tests/les_miserables.txt:25784:is condemned. Monasteries, when they abound in a nation, are clogs in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25785:its circulation, cumbrous establishments, centres of idleness where
tests/les_miserables.txt:25786:centres of labor should exist. Monastic communities are to the great
tests/les_miserables.txt:25787:social community what the mistletoe is to the oak, what the wart is to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25789:impoverishment of the country. The monastic regime, good at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25790:beginning of civilization, useful in the reduction of the brutal by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25791:spiritual, is bad when peoples have reached their manhood. Moreover,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25792:when it becomes relaxed, and when it enters into its period of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25793:disorder, it becomes bad for the very reasons which rendered it
tests/les_miserables.txt:25794:salutary in its period of purity, because it still continues to set the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25797:Claustration has had its day. Cloisters, useful in the early education
tests/les_miserables.txt:25798:of modern civilization, have embarrassed its growth, and are injurious
tests/les_miserables.txt:25800:to man are concerned, monasteries, which were good in the tenth
tests/les_miserables.txt:25801:century, questionable in the fifteenth, are detestable in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25802:nineteenth. The leprosy of monasticism has gnawed nearly to a skeleton
tests/les_miserables.txt:25804:the splendor of Europe for centuries; and, at the present day, these
tests/les_miserables.txt:25805:two illustrious peoples are but just beginning to convalesce, thanks to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25808:The convent—the ancient female convent in particular, such as it still
tests/les_miserables.txt:25809:presents itself on the threshold of this century, in Italy, in Austria,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25810:in Spain—is one of the most sombre concretions of the Middle Ages. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:25811:cloister, that cloister, is the point of intersection of horrors. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:25812:Catholic cloister, properly speaking, is wholly filled with the black
tests/les_miserables.txt:25813:radiance of death.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25815:The Spanish convent is the most funereal of all. There rise, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25816:obscurity, beneath vaults filled with gloom, beneath domes vague with
tests/les_miserables.txt:25817:shadow, massive altars of Babel, as high as cathedrals; there immense
tests/les_miserables.txt:25818:white crucifixes hang from chains in the dark; there are extended, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:25820:hideous and magnificent, with their elbows displaying the bones, their
tests/les_miserables.txt:25822:crowned with silver thorns, nailed with nails of gold, with blood drops
tests/les_miserables.txt:25825:their sides bruised with the hair shirt and their iron-tipped scourges,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25826:their breasts crushed with wicker hurdles, their knees excoriated with
tests/les_miserables.txt:25827:prayer; women who think themselves wives, spectres who think themselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:25831:under their veil resembles the indescribably tragic respiration of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25832:death. The abbess, a spectre, sanctifies them and terrifies them. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:25833:immaculate one is there, and very fierce. Such are the ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:25834:monasteries of Spain. Liars of terrible devotion, caverns of virgins,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25835:ferocious places.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25837:Catholic Spain is more Roman than Rome herself. The Spanish convent
tests/les_miserables.txt:25838:was, above all others, the Catholic convent. There was a flavor of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25839:Orient about it. The archbishop, the kislar-aga of heaven, locked up
tests/les_miserables.txt:25840:and kept watch over this seraglio of souls reserved for God. The nun
tests/les_miserables.txt:25841:was the odalisque, the priest was the eunuch. The fervent were chosen
tests/les_miserables.txt:25843:descended from the cross and became the ecstasy of the cloistered one.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25844:Lofty walls guarded the mystic sultana, who had the crucified for her
tests/les_miserables.txt:25845:sultan, from all living distraction. A glance on the outer world was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25846:infidelity. The _in pace_ replaced the leather sack. That which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:25847:cast into the sea in the East was thrown into the ground in the West.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25853:adopted the expedient of smiling at them. There has come into fashion a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25855:invalidating the commentaries of philosophy, of eliding all
tests/les_miserables.txt:25856:embarrassing facts and all gloomy questions. _A matter for
tests/les_miserables.txt:25857:declamations_, say the clever. Declamations, repeat the foolish.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25858:Jean-Jacques a declaimer; Diderot a declaimer; Voltaire on Calas,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25859:Labarre, and Sirven, declaimers. I know not who has recently discovered
tests/les_miserables.txt:25860:that Tacitus was a declaimer, that Nero was a victim, and that pity is
tests/les_miserables.txt:25861:decidedly due to “that poor Holofernes.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:25864:Facts, however, are awkward things to disconcert, and they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:25866:leagues distant from Brussels,—there are relics of the Middle Ages
tests/les_miserables.txt:25867:there which are attainable for everybody,—at the Abbey of Villers, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25868:hole of the oubliettes, in the middle of the field which was formerly
tests/les_miserables.txt:25869:the courtyard of the cloister, and on the banks of the Thil, four stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:25870:dungeons, half under ground, half under the water. They were _in pace_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25871:Each of these dungeons has the remains of an iron door, a vault, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25872:grated opening which, on the outside, is two feet above the level of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25875:always soaked. The occupant of the _in pace_ had this wet soil for his
tests/les_miserables.txt:25876:bed. In one of these dungeons, there is a fragment of an iron necklet
tests/les_miserables.txt:25877:riveted to the wall; in another, there can be seen a square box made of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25880:coverlid of stone on top. This exists. It can be seen. It can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:25881:touched. These _in pace_, these dungeons, these iron hinges, these
tests/les_miserables.txt:25882:necklets, that lofty peep-hole on a level with the river’s current,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25883:that box of stone closed with a lid of granite like a tomb, with this
tests/les_miserables.txt:25884:difference, that the dead man here was a living being, that soil which
tests/les_miserables.txt:25885:is but mud, that vault hole, those oozing walls,—what declaimers!
tests/les_miserables.txt:25893:Monasticism, such as it existed in Spain, and such as it still exists
tests/les_miserables.txt:25894:in Thibet, is a sort of phthisis for civilization. It stops life short.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25895:It simply depopulates. Claustration, castration. It has been the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25896:scourge of Europe. Add to this the violence so often done to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25897:conscience, the forced vocations, feudalism bolstered up by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25898:cloister, the right of the first-born pouring the excess of the family
tests/les_miserables.txt:25899:into monasticism, the ferocities of which we have just spoken, the _in
tests/les_miserables.txt:25900:pace_, the closed mouths, the walled-up brains, so many unfortunate
tests/les_miserables.txt:25901:minds placed in the dungeon of eternal vows, the taking of the habit,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25904:frock and the veil,—those two winding-sheets of human devising.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25905:Nevertheless, at certain points and in certain places, in spite of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25906:philosophy, in spite of progress, the spirit of the cloister persists
tests/les_miserables.txt:25907:in the midst of the nineteenth century, and a singular ascetic
tests/les_miserables.txt:25908:recrudescence is, at this moment, astonishing the civilized world. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:25909:obstinacy of antiquated institutions in perpetuating themselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:25910:resembles the stubbornness of the rancid perfume which should claim our
tests/les_miserables.txt:25911:hair, the pretensions of the spoiled fish which should persist in being
tests/les_miserables.txt:25912:eaten, the persecution of the child’s garment which should insist on
tests/les_miserables.txt:25913:clothing the man, the tenderness of corpses which should return to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25914:embrace the living.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25916:“Ingrates!” says the garment, “I protected you in inclement weather.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25917:Why will you have nothing to do with me?” “I have just come from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25919:have loved you,” says the corpse. “I have civilized you,” says the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25920:convent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25925:To dream of the indefinite prolongation of defunct things, and of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25926:government of men by embalming, to restore dogmas in a bad condition,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25927:to regild shrines, to patch up cloisters, to rebless reliquaries, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:25928:refurnish superstitions, to revictual fanaticisms, to put new handles
tests/les_miserables.txt:25929:on holy water brushes and militarism, to reconstitute monasticism and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25930:militarism, to believe in the salvation of society by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25931:multiplication of parasites, to force the past on the present,—this
tests/les_miserables.txt:25932:seems strange. Still, there are theorists who hold such theories. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:25933:theorists, who are in other respects people of intelligence, have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25934:very simple process; they apply to the past a glazing which they call
tests/les_miserables.txt:25935:social order, divine right, morality, family, the respect of elders,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25936:antique authority, sacred tradition, legitimacy, religion; and they go
tests/les_miserables.txt:25937:about shouting, “Look! take this, honest people.” This logic was known
tests/les_miserables.txt:25938:to the ancients. The soothsayers practise it. They rubbed a black
tests/les_miserables.txt:25939:heifer over with chalk, and said, “She is white, _Bos cretatus_.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:25942:As for us, we respect the past here and there, and we spare it, above
tests/les_miserables.txt:25943:all, provided that it consents to be dead. If it insists on being
tests/les_miserables.txt:25944:alive, we attack it, and we try to kill it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25946:Superstitions, bigotries, affected devotion, prejudices, those forms,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25947:all forms as they are, are tenacious of life; they have teeth and nails
tests/les_miserables.txt:25948:in their smoke, and they must be clasped close, body to body, and war
tests/les_miserables.txt:25949:must be made on them, and that without truce; for it is one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25950:fatalities of humanity to be condemned to eternal combat with phantoms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25951:It is difficult to seize darkness by the throat, and to hurl it to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:25954:A convent in France, in the broad daylight of the nineteenth century,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25955:is a college of owls facing the light. A cloister, caught in the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:25956:act of asceticism, in the very heart of the city of ’89 and of 1830 and
tests/les_miserables.txt:25957:of 1848, Rome blossoming out in Paris, is an anachronism. In ordinary
tests/les_miserables.txt:25958:times, in order to dissolve an anachronism and to cause it to vanish,
tests/les_miserables.txt:25964:Let us fight, but let us make a distinction. The peculiar property of
tests/les_miserables.txt:25965:truth is never to commit excesses. What need has it of exaggeration?
tests/les_miserables.txt:25966:There is that which it is necessary to destroy, and there is that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:25967:it is simply necessary to elucidate and examine. What a force is kindly
tests/les_miserables.txt:25971:So, given the nineteenth century, we are opposed, as a general
tests/les_miserables.txt:25973:India as well as in Turkey, to ascetic claustration. Whoever says
tests/les_miserables.txt:25974:cloister, says marsh. Their putrescence is evident, their stagnation is
tests/les_miserables.txt:25975:unhealthy, their fermentation infects people with fever, and etiolates
tests/les_miserables.txt:25976:them; their multiplication becomes a plague of Egypt. We cannot think
tests/les_miserables.txt:25981:This said, the religious question remains. This question has certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:25991:Men unite themselves and dwell in communities. By virtue of what right?
tests/les_miserables.txt:25992:By virtue of the right of association.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25995:the right which every man has to open or shut his door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:25997:They do not come forth. By virtue of what right? By virtue of the right
tests/les_miserables.txt:25998:to go and come, which implies the right to remain at home.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26002:They speak in low tones; they drop their eyes; they toil. They renounce
tests/les_miserables.txt:26004:They are clothed in coarse woollen or coarse linen. Not one of them
tests/les_miserables.txt:26005:possesses in his own right anything whatever. On entering there, each
tests/les_miserables.txt:26006:one who was rich makes himself poor. What he has, he gives to all. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:26007:who was what is called noble, a gentleman and a lord, is the equal of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26008:him who was a peasant. The cell is identical for all. All undergo the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26009:same tonsure, wear the same frock, eat the same black bread, sleep on
tests/les_miserables.txt:26010:the same straw, die on the same ashes. The same sack on their backs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26011:the same rope around their loins. If the decision has been to go
tests/les_miserables.txt:26012:barefoot, all go barefoot. There may be a prince among them; that
tests/les_miserables.txt:26013:prince is the same shadow as the rest. No titles. Even family names
tests/les_miserables.txt:26015:equality of baptismal names. They have dissolved the carnal family, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26016:constituted in their community a spiritual family. They have no other
tests/les_miserables.txt:26017:relatives than all men. They succor the poor, they care for the sick.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26018:They elect those whom they obey. They call each other “my brother.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26021:You stop me and exclaim, “But that is the ideal convent!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26024:It is sufficient that it may be the possible convent, that I should
tests/les_miserables.txt:26025:take notice of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26027:Thence it results that, in the preceding book, I have spoken of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26028:convent with respectful accents. The Middle Ages cast aside, Asia cast
tests/les_miserables.txt:26029:aside, the historical and political question held in reserve, from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26030:purely philosophical point of view, outside the requirements of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26031:militant policy, on condition that the monastery shall be absolutely a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26032:voluntary matter and shall contain only consenting parties, I shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:26033:always consider a cloistered community with a certain attentive, and,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26034:in some respects, a deferential gravity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26036:Wherever there is a community, there is a commune; where there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26037:commune, there is right. The monastery is the product of the formula:
tests/les_miserables.txt:26039:transfiguration! Liberty suffices to transform the monastery into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26040:republic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26042:Let us continue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26045:dress themselves in coarse woollen, they are equals, they call each
tests/les_miserables.txt:26052:They gaze on the darkness, they kneel, and they clasp their hands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26071:permanent; necessarily substantial, since it is infinite; and because,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26072:if it lacked matter it would be bounded; necessarily intelligent, since
tests/les_miserables.txt:26073:it is infinite, and because, if it lacked intelligence, it would end
tests/les_miserables.txt:26074:there? Does this infinite awaken in us the idea of essence, while we
tests/les_miserables.txt:26075:can attribute to ourselves only the idea of existence? In other terms,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26076:is it not the absolute, of which we are only the relative?
tests/les_miserables.txt:26080:plural!) superposed, the one upon the other? Is not this second
tests/les_miserables.txt:26081:infinite, so to speak, subjacent to the first? Is it not the latter’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:26082:mirror, reflection, echo, an abyss which is concentric with another
tests/les_miserables.txt:26083:abyss? Is this second infinity intelligent also? Does it think? Does it
tests/les_miserables.txt:26084:love? Does it will? If these two infinities are intelligent, each of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26085:them has a will principle, and there is an _I_ in the upper infinity as
tests/les_miserables.txt:26089:To place the infinity here below in contact, by the medium of thought,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26090:with the infinity on high, is called praying.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26093:reform and transform. Certain faculties in man are directed towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26094:Unknown; thought, reverie, prayer. The Unknown is an ocean. What is
tests/les_miserables.txt:26095:conscience? It is the compass of the Unknown. Thought, reverie,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26096:prayer,—these are great and mysterious radiations. Let us respect them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26097:Whither go these majestic irradiations of the soul? Into the shadow;
tests/les_miserables.txt:26100:The grandeur of democracy is to disown nothing and to deny nothing of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26104:To crush fanaticism and to venerate the infinite, such is the law. Let
tests/les_miserables.txt:26105:us not confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26106:creation, and to the contemplation of its branches full of stars. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:26108:the miracle, to adore the incomprehensible and reject the absurd, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:26109:admit, as an inexplicable fact, only what is necessary, to purify
tests/les_miserables.txt:26110:belief, to remove superstitions from above religion; to clear God of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26111:caterpillars.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26120:are sincere. Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26122:There is, as we know, a philosophy which denies the infinite. There is
tests/les_miserables.txt:26123:also a philosophy, pathologically classified, which denies the sun;
tests/les_miserables.txt:26124:this philosophy is called blindness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26126:To erect a sense which we lack into a source of truth, is a fine blind
tests/les_miserables.txt:26127:man’s self-sufficiency.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26129:The curious thing is the haughty, superior, and compassionate airs
tests/les_miserables.txt:26130:which this groping philosophy assumes towards the philosophy which
tests/les_miserables.txt:26131:beholds God. One fancies he hears a mole crying, “I pity them with
tests/les_miserables.txt:26136:led back to the truth by their very force, they are not absolutely sure
tests/les_miserables.txt:26138:and in any case, if they do not believe in God, being great minds, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:26141:We salute them as philosophers, while inexorably denouncing their
tests/les_miserables.txt:26146:The remarkable thing about it is, also, their facility in paying
tests/les_miserables.txt:26147:themselves off with words. A metaphysical school of the North,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26148:impregnated to some extent with fog, has fancied that it has worked a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26149:revolution in human understanding by replacing the word Force with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26153:fecund in results, indeed, if we were to add: “the universe wills.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26154:Why? Because it would come to this: the plant wills, therefore it has
tests/les_miserables.txt:26157:As for us, who, however, in contradistinction to this school, reject
tests/les_miserables.txt:26158:nothing _a priori_, a will in the plant, accepted by this school,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26159:appears to us more difficult to admit than a will in the universe
tests/les_miserables.txt:26163:any other conditions than a denial of the infinite. We have
tests/les_miserables.txt:26167:becomes “a mental conception.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26170:With nihilism, no discussion is possible; for the nihilist logic doubts
tests/les_miserables.txt:26171:the existence of its interlocutor, and is not quite sure that it exists
tests/les_miserables.txt:26175:“a mental conception.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26178:Only, it does not perceive that all which it has denied it admits in
tests/les_miserables.txt:26179:the lump, simply by the utterance of the word, mind.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26181:In short, no way is open to the thought by a philosophy which makes all
tests/les_miserables.txt:26188:There is no such thing as nothingness. Zero does not exist. Everything
tests/les_miserables.txt:26193:Even to see and to show does not suffice. Philosophy should be an
tests/les_miserables.txt:26194:energy; it should have for effort and effect to ameliorate the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26195:condition of man. Socrates should enter into Adam and produce Marcus
tests/les_miserables.txt:26197:from the man of felicity. Eden should be changed into a Lyceum. Science
tests/les_miserables.txt:26198:should be a cordial. To enjoy,—what a sad aim, and what a paltry
tests/les_miserables.txt:26200:give them all as an elixir the notion of God, to make conscience and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26201:science fraternize in them, to render them just by this mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:26202:confrontation; such is the function of real philosophy. Morality is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26203:blossoming out of truths. Contemplation leads to action. The absolute
tests/les_miserables.txt:26204:should be practicable. It is necessary that the ideal should be
tests/les_miserables.txt:26206:which has the right to say: _Take, this is my body, this is my blood_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26207:Wisdom is holy communion. It is on this condition that it ceases to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:26208:a sterile love of science and becomes the one and sovereign mode of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26211:Philosophy should not be a corbel erected on mystery to gaze upon it at
tests/les_miserables.txt:26212:its ease, without any other result than that of being convenient to
tests/les_miserables.txt:26213:curiosity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26216:occasion, we will confine ourselves to saying that we neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:26218:those two forces which are their two motors: faith and love.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26224:Ideal, absolute, perfection, infinity: identical words.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26232:History and philosophy have eternal duties, which are, at the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:26233:time, simple duties; to combat Caiphas the High-priest, Draco the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26234:Lawgiver, Trimalcion the Legislator, Tiberius the Emperor; this is
tests/les_miserables.txt:26235:clear, direct, and limpid, and offers no obscurity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26237:But the right to live apart, even with its inconveniences and its
tests/les_miserables.txt:26238:abuses, insists on being stated and taken into account. Cenobitism is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26241:When one speaks of convents, those abodes of error, but of innocence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26242:of aberration but of good-will, of ignorance but of devotion, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26243:torture but of martyrdom, it always becomes necessary to say either yes
tests/les_miserables.txt:26246:A convent is a contradiction. Its object, salvation; its means thereto,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26247:sacrifice. The convent is supreme egoism having for its result supreme
tests/les_miserables.txt:26250:To abdicate with the object of reigning seems to be the device of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26251:monasticism.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26253:In the cloister, one suffers in order to enjoy. One draws a bill of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26254:exchange on death. One discounts in terrestrial gloom celestial light.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26255:In the cloister, hell is accepted in advance as a post obit on
tests/les_miserables.txt:26258:The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for with
tests/les_miserables.txt:26261:It does not seem to us, that on such a subject mockery is permissible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26264:The just man frowns, but never smiles with a malicious sneer. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:26265:understand wrath, but not malice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26275:We blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues, we despise
tests/les_miserables.txt:26276:the spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal; but we everywhere
tests/les_miserables.txt:26281:A faith; this is a necessity for man. Woe to him who believes nothing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26283:One is not unoccupied because one is absorbed. There is visible labor
tests/les_miserables.txt:26286:To contemplate is to labor, to think is to act.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26288:Folded arms toil, clasped hands work. A gaze fixed on heaven is a work.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26292:In our opinion, cenobites are not lazy men, and recluses are not
tests/les_miserables.txt:26300:Trappe replies to Horace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26302:To mingle with one’s life a certain presence of the sepulchre,—this is
tests/les_miserables.txt:26303:the law of the sage; and it is the law of the ascetic. In this respect,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26304:the ascetic and the sage converge. There is a material growth; we admit
tests/les_miserables.txt:26306:vivacious spirits say:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:26312:Alas! In the presence of the darkness which environs us, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:26313:awaits us, in our ignorance of what the immense dispersion will make of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26315:performed by these souls.” And we add: “There is probably no work which
tests/les_miserables.txt:26319:There certainly must be some who pray constantly for those who never
tests/les_miserables.txt:26330:We are of the number who believe in the wretchedness of orisons, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26333:Moreover, at this minute which we are now traversing,—a minute which
tests/les_miserables.txt:26334:will not, fortunately, leave its impress on the nineteenth century,—at
tests/les_miserables.txt:26336:elevated, among so many mortals whose morality consists in enjoyment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26340:The monastery is a renunciation. Sacrifice wrongly directed is still
tests/les_miserables.txt:26341:sacrifice. To mistake a grave error for a duty has a grandeur of its
tests/les_miserables.txt:26345:sides until all aspects have been impartially exhausted, the monastery,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26346:the female convent in particular,—for in our century it is woman who
tests/les_miserables.txt:26347:suffers the most, and in this exile of the cloister there is something
tests/les_miserables.txt:26348:of protestation,—the female convent has incontestably a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:26351:This cloistered existence which is so austere, so depressing, a few of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26352:whose features we have just traced, is not life, for it is not liberty;
tests/les_miserables.txt:26353:it is not the tomb, for it is not plenitude; it is the strange place
tests/les_miserables.txt:26354:whence one beholds, as from the crest of a lofty mountain, on one side
tests/les_miserables.txt:26357:obscured by both at the same time, where the ray of life which has
tests/les_miserables.txt:26358:become enfeebled is mingled with the vague ray of death; it is the half
tests/les_miserables.txt:26359:obscurity of the tomb.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26364:envy, of those devoted, trembling and trusting creatures, of these
tests/les_miserables.txt:26366:mystery, waiting between the world which is closed and heaven which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:26367:not yet open, turned towards the light which one cannot see, possessing
tests/les_miserables.txt:26385:It was into this house that Jean Valjean had, as Fauchelevent expressed
tests/les_miserables.txt:26389:He had scaled the wall of the garden which formed the angle of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:26390:Polonceau. That hymn of the angels which he had heard in the middle of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26391:the night, was the nuns chanting matins; that hall, of which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:26392:caught a glimpse in the gloom, was the chapel. That phantom which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:26393:had seen stretched on the ground was the sister who was making
tests/les_miserables.txt:26394:reparation; that bell, the sound of which had so strangely surprised
tests/les_miserables.txt:26395:him, was the gardener’s bell attached to the knee of Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:26396:Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26398:Cosette once put to bed, Jean Valjean and Fauchelevent had, as we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:26399:already seen, supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese before a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26400:good, crackling fire; then, the only bed in the hut being occupied by
tests/les_miserables.txt:26401:Cosette, each threw himself on a truss of straw.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26404:henceforth.” This remark trotted through Fauchelevent’s head all night
tests/les_miserables.txt:26409:Jean Valjean, feeling that he was discovered and that Javert was on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:26410:scent, understood that he and Cosette were lost if they returned to
tests/les_miserables.txt:26411:Paris. Then the new storm which had just burst upon him had stranded
tests/les_miserables.txt:26412:him in this cloister. Jean Valjean had, henceforth, but one thought,—to
tests/les_miserables.txt:26413:remain there. Now, for an unfortunate man in his position, this convent
tests/les_miserables.txt:26414:was both the safest and the most dangerous of places; the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:26415:dangerous, because, as no men might enter there, if he were discovered,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26416:it was a flagrant offence, and Jean Valjean would find but one step
tests/les_miserables.txt:26417:intervening between the convent and prison; the safest, because, if he
tests/les_miserables.txt:26418:could manage to get himself accepted there and remain there, who would
tests/les_miserables.txt:26419:ever seek him in such a place? To dwell in an impossible place was
tests/les_miserables.txt:26422:On his side, Fauchelevent was cudgelling his brains. He began by
tests/les_miserables.txt:26423:declaring to himself that he understood nothing of the matter. How had
tests/les_miserables.txt:26425:walls are not to be stepped over. How did he get there with a child?
tests/les_miserables.txt:26426:One cannot scale a perpendicular wall with a child in one’s arms. Who
tests/les_miserables.txt:26427:was that child? Where did they both come from? Since Fauchelevent had
tests/les_miserables.txt:26428:lived in the convent, he had heard nothing of M. sur M., and he knew
tests/les_miserables.txt:26429:nothing of what had taken place there. Father Madeleine had an air
tests/les_miserables.txt:26430:which discouraged questions; and besides, Fauchelevent said to himself:
tests/les_miserables.txt:26432:prestige in Fauchelevent’s eyes. Only, from some words which Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:26433:Valjean had let fall, the gardener thought he could draw the inference
tests/les_miserables.txt:26434:that M. Madeleine had probably become bankrupt through the hard times,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26435:and that he was pursued by his creditors; or that he had compromised
tests/les_miserables.txt:26436:himself in some political affair, and was in hiding; which last did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:26437:displease Fauchelevent, who, like many of our peasants of the North,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26439:had selected the convent as a refuge, and it was quite simple that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:26440:should wish to remain there. But the inexplicable point, to which
tests/les_miserables.txt:26441:Fauchelevent returned constantly and over which he wearied his brain,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26443:little girl with him. Fauchelevent saw them, touched them, spoke to
tests/les_miserables.txt:26444:them, and still did not believe it possible. The incomprehensible had
tests/les_miserables.txt:26445:just made its entrance into Fauchelevent’s hut. Fauchelevent groped
tests/les_miserables.txt:26446:about amid conjectures, and could see nothing clearly but this: “M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26447:Madeleine saved my life.” This certainty alone was sufficient and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26448:decided his course. He said to himself: “It is my turn now.” He added
tests/les_miserables.txt:26449:in his conscience: “M. Madeleine did not stop to deliberate when it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:26450:a question of thrusting himself under the cart for the purpose of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26456:the same. Since he is a saint, shall I save him? Just the same.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26459:But what a problem it was to manage to have him remain in the convent!
tests/les_miserables.txt:26460:Fauchelevent did not recoil in the face of this almost chimerical
tests/les_miserables.txt:26461:undertaking; this poor peasant of Picardy without any other ladder than
tests/les_miserables.txt:26462:his self-devotion, his good will, and a little of that old rustic
tests/les_miserables.txt:26463:cunning, on this occasion enlisted in the service of a generous
tests/les_miserables.txt:26464:enterprise, undertook to scale the difficulties of the cloister, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26465:the steep escarpments of the rule of Saint-Benoît. Father Fauchelevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:26468:world, found it sweet to be grateful, and perceiving a generous action
tests/les_miserables.txt:26470:when he is dying, should find close to his hand a glass of good wine
tests/les_miserables.txt:26471:which he had never tasted, and should swallow it with avidity. We may
tests/les_miserables.txt:26472:add, that the air which he had breathed for many years in this convent
tests/les_miserables.txt:26474:action of some kind absolutely necessary to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26478:We have just called him a _poor peasant of Picardy_. That description
tests/les_miserables.txt:26479:is just, but incomplete. At the point of this story which we have now
tests/les_miserables.txt:26480:reached, a little of Father Fauchelevent’s physiology becomes useful.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26481:He was a peasant, but he had been a notary, which added trickery to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:26482:cunning, and penetration to his ingenuousness. Having, through various
tests/les_miserables.txt:26483:causes, failed in his business, he had descended to the calling of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26484:carter and a laborer. But, in spite of oaths and lashings, which horses
tests/les_miserables.txt:26486:some natural wit; he talked good grammar; he conversed, which is a rare
tests/les_miserables.txt:26488:almost like a gentleman with a hat.” Fauchelevent belonged, in fact, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:26489:that species, which the impertinent and flippant vocabulary of the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:26490:century qualified as _demi-bourgeois, demi-lout_, and which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26491:metaphors showered by the château upon the thatched cottage ticketed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:26492:the pigeon-hole of the plebeian: _rather rustic, rather citified;
tests/les_miserables.txt:26493:pepper and salt_. Fauchelevent, though sorely tried and harshly used by
tests/les_miserables.txt:26495:an impulsive man, and extremely spontaneous in his actions; a precious
tests/les_miserables.txt:26496:quality which prevents one from ever being wicked. His defects and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:26497:vices, for he had some, were all superficial; in short, his physiognomy
tests/les_miserables.txt:26498:was of the kind which succeeds with an observer. His aged face had none
tests/les_miserables.txt:26499:of those disagreeable wrinkles at the top of the forehead, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:26500:signify malice or stupidity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26502:At daybreak, Father Fauchelevent opened his eyes, after having done an
tests/les_miserables.txt:26504:of straw, and watching Cosette’s slumbers. Fauchelevent sat up and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26507:“Now that you are here, how are you going to contrive to enter?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26513:The two men took counsel together.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26515:“In the first place,” said Fauchelevent, “you will begin by not setting
tests/les_miserables.txt:26516:foot outside of this chamber, either you or the child. One step in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26523:“Monsieur Madeleine,” resumed Fauchelevent, “you have arrived at a very
tests/les_miserables.txt:26524:auspicious moment, I mean to say a very inauspicious moment; one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26525:ladies is very ill. This will prevent them from looking much in our
tests/les_miserables.txt:26526:direction. It seems that she is dying. The prayers of the forty hours
tests/les_miserables.txt:26527:are being said. The whole community is in confusion. That occupies
tests/les_miserables.txt:26528:them. The one who is on the point of departure is a saint. In fact, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:26529:are all saints here; all the difference between them and me is that
tests/les_miserables.txt:26530:they say ‘our cell,’ and that I say ‘my cabin.’ The prayers for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26532:peace here for to-day; but I will not answer for to-morrow.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26535:“Still,” observed Jean Valjean, “this cottage is in the niche of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26537:visible from the convent.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26540:“And I add that the nuns never come near it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26545:The interrogation mark which accentuated this “well” signified: “it
tests/les_miserables.txt:26546:seems to me that one may remain concealed here?” It was to this
tests/les_miserables.txt:26547:interrogation point that Fauchelevent responded:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:26554:Just as Fauchelevent opened his mouth to explain the words which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:26562:The bell struck a second time.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26564:“It is the knell, Monsieur Madeleine. The bell will continue to strike
tests/les_miserables.txt:26565:once a minute for twenty-four hours, until the body is taken from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26566:church.—You see, they play. At recreation hours it suffices to have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26568:hunt and rummage for it all about here. Those cherubs are devils.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26573:“The little girls. You would be very quickly discovered. They would
tests/les_miserables.txt:26575:recreation hour. The day will be entirely devoted to prayers. You hear
tests/les_miserables.txt:26576:the bell. As I told you, a stroke each minute. It is the death knell.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26579:“I understand, Father Fauchelevent. There are pupils.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26584:“Here is Cosette’s education already provided.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26587:Fauchelevent exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:26595:Jean Valjean fell into more and more profound thought.—“This convent
tests/les_miserables.txt:26598:Then he raised his voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:26600:“Yes, the difficulty is to remain here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26603:“No,” said Fauchelevent, “the difficulty is to get out.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26606:Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26611:“Yes, Monsieur Madeleine. In order to return here it is first necessary
tests/les_miserables.txt:26616:Fauchelevent went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:26618:“You must not be found here in this fashion. Whence come you? For me,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26619:you fall from heaven, because I know you; but the nuns require one to
tests/les_miserables.txt:26623:All at once they heard a rather complicated pealing from another bell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26625:“Ah!” said Fauchelevent, “they are ringing up the vocal mothers. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:26626:are going to the chapter. They always hold a chapter when any one dies.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26627:She died at daybreak. People generally do die at daybreak. But cannot
tests/les_miserables.txt:26628:you get out by the way in which you entered? Come, I do not ask for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26632:Jean Valjean turned pale; the very thought of descending again into
tests/les_miserables.txt:26634:forest filled with tigers, and once out of it, imagine a friendly
tests/les_miserables.txt:26635:counsel that shall advise you to return thither! Jean Valjean pictured
tests/les_miserables.txt:26636:to himself the whole police force still engaged in swarming in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:26637:quarter, agents on the watch, sentinels everywhere, frightful fists
tests/les_miserables.txt:26638:extended towards his collar, Javert at the corner of the intersection
tests/les_miserables.txt:26641:“Impossible!” said he. “Father Fauchelevent, say that I fell from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26645:“But I believe it, I believe it,” retorted Fauchelevent. “You have no
tests/les_miserables.txt:26647:the purpose of getting a good look at you close to, and then dropped
tests/les_miserables.txt:26648:you. Only, he meant to place you in a man’s convent; he made a mistake.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26650:inform the municipality that the dead-doctor is to come here and view a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26651:corpse. All that is the ceremony of dying. These good ladies are not at
tests/les_miserables.txt:26652:all fond of that visit. A doctor is a man who does not believe in
tests/les_miserables.txt:26654:quickly they have had the doctor summoned this time! What is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26667:“It will be easy enough for her to get out of here. I have my service
tests/les_miserables.txt:26668:door which opens on the courtyard. I knock. The porter opens; I have my
tests/les_miserables.txt:26669:vintage basket on my back, the child is in it, I go out. Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:26670:Fauchelevent goes out with his basket—that is perfectly natural. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:26671:will tell the child to keep very quiet. She will be under the cover. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:26675:niece of mine, and that she is to keep her for me until to-morrow. Then
tests/les_miserables.txt:26676:the little one will re-enter with you; for I will contrive to have you
tests/les_miserables.txt:26682:“No one must see me, the whole point lies there, Father Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26683:Find some means of getting me out in a basket, under cover, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:26687:Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26690:A third peal created a diversion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26692:“That is the dead-doctor taking his departure,” said Fauchelevent. “He
tests/les_miserables.txt:26693:has taken a look and said: ‘She is dead, that is well.’ When the doctor
tests/les_miserables.txt:26694:has signed the passport for paradise, the undertaker’s company sends a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26695:coffin. If it is a mother, the mothers lay her out; if she is a sister,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26696:the sisters lay her out. After which, I nail her up. That forms a part
tests/les_miserables.txt:26698:placed in a lower hall of the church which communicates with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26699:street, and into which no man may enter save the doctor of the dead. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:26700:don’t count the undertaker’s men and myself as men. It is in that hall
tests/les_miserables.txt:26701:that I nail up the coffin. The undertaker’s men come and get it, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26702:whip up, coachman! that’s the way one goes to heaven. They fetch a box
tests/les_miserables.txt:26707:A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of the sleeping
tests/les_miserables.txt:26710:He was no longer listening to Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26712:That one is not listened to is no reason for preserving silence. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:26715:“The grave is dug in the Vaugirard cemetery. They declare that they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:26716:going to suppress that Vaugirard cemetery. It is an ancient cemetery
tests/les_miserables.txt:26717:which is outside the regulations, which has no uniform, and which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:26718:going to retire. It is a shame, for it is convenient. I have a friend
tests/les_miserables.txt:26720:privilege, it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall. There is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26721:special permission from the Prefecture on their behalf. But how many
tests/les_miserables.txt:26722:events have happened since yesterday! Mother Crucifixion is dead, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26728:Fauchelevent caught the word.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26733:A fourth peal burst out. Fauchelevent hastily detached the belled
tests/les_miserables.txt:26734:knee-cap from its nail and buckled it on his knee again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26737:pricking myself on the tongue of my buckle. Monsieur Madeleine, don’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:26738:stir from here, and wait for me. Something new has come up. If you are
tests/les_miserables.txt:26739:hungry, there is wine, bread and cheese.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26742:And he hastened out of the hut, crying: “Coming! coming!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26745:Jean Valjean watched him hurrying across the garden as fast as his
tests/les_miserables.txt:26746:crooked leg would permit, casting a sidelong glance by the way on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:26747:melon patch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26749:Less than ten minutes later, Father Fauchelevent, whose bell put the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26750:nuns in his road to flight, tapped gently at a door, and a gentle voice
tests/les_miserables.txt:26754:gardener on business. This parlor adjoined the chapter hall. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:26755:prioress, seated on the only chair in the parlor, was waiting for
tests/les_miserables.txt:26756:Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26764:It is the peculiarity of certain persons and certain professions,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26765:notably priests and nuns, to wear a grave and agitated air on critical
tests/les_miserables.txt:26766:occasions. At the moment when Fauchelevent entered, this double form of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26767:preoccupation was imprinted on the countenance of the prioress, who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:26768:that wise and charming Mademoiselle de Blemeur, Mother Innocente, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:26769:was ordinarily cheerful.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26771:The gardener made a timid bow, and remained at the door of the cell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26777:This abbreviation had been adopted in the convent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26779:Fauchelevent bowed again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26790:“And so have I,” said Fauchelevent with a boldness which caused him
tests/les_miserables.txt:26796:“Ah! you have a communication to make to me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26805:Goodman Fauchelevent, the ex-notary, belonged to the category of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26806:peasants who have assurance. A certain clever ignorance constitutes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26807:force; you do not distrust it, and you are caught by it. Fauchelevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:26808:had been a success during the something more than two years which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:26809:had passed in the convent. Always solitary and busied about his
tests/les_miserables.txt:26810:gardening, he had nothing else to do than to indulge his curiosity. As
tests/les_miserables.txt:26811:he was at a distance from all those veiled women passing to and fro, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:26813:sharpness he had succeeded in clothing all those phantoms with flesh,
tests/les_miserables.txt:26814:and those corpses were alive for him. He was like a deaf man whose
tests/les_miserables.txt:26815:sight grows keener, and like a blind man whose hearing becomes more
tests/les_miserables.txt:26816:acute. He had applied himself to riddling out the significance of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26817:different peals, and he had succeeded, so that this taciturn and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26818:enigmatical cloister possessed no secrets for him; the sphinx babbled
tests/les_miserables.txt:26819:all her secrets in his ear. Fauchelevent knew all and concealed all;
tests/les_miserables.txt:26820:that constituted his art. The whole convent thought him stupid. A great
tests/les_miserables.txt:26821:merit in religion. The vocal mothers made much of Fauchelevent. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:26822:a curious mute. He inspired confidence. Moreover, he was regular, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:26823:never went out except for well-demonstrated requirements of the orchard
tests/les_miserables.txt:26824:and vegetable garden. This discretion of conduct had inured to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:26825:credit. Nonetheless, he had set two men to chattering: the porter, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:26826:the convent, and he knew the singularities of their parlor, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26827:grave-digger, at the cemetery, and he was acquainted with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26828:peculiarities of their sepulture; in this way, he possessed a double
tests/les_miserables.txt:26829:light on the subject of these nuns, one as to their life, the other as
tests/les_miserables.txt:26830:to their death. But he did not abuse his knowledge. The congregation
tests/les_miserables.txt:26833:difficult to replace him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26835:The goodman, with the assurance of a person who feels that he is
tests/les_miserables.txt:26836:appreciated, entered into a rather diffuse and very deep rustic
tests/les_miserables.txt:26838:his infirmities, the surcharge of years counting double for him
tests/les_miserables.txt:26839:henceforth, of the increasing demands of his work, of the great size of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26840:the garden, of nights which must be passed, like the last, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:26841:instance, when he had been obliged to put straw mats over the melon
tests/les_miserables.txt:26842:beds, because of the moon, and he wound up as follows: “That he had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26844:second movement on the part of the prioress, but one expressive of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26845:reassurance),—“that, if he might be permitted, this brother would come
tests/les_miserables.txt:26846:and live with him and help him, that he was an excellent gardener, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:26847:the community would receive from him good service, better than his own;
tests/les_miserables.txt:26849:felt that his health was broken and that he was insufficient for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:26852:might be reared for God in the house, and who might, who knows, become
tests/les_miserables.txt:26859:“Could you procure a stout iron bar between now and this evening?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26868:“Yes, reverend Mother,” replied Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26871:room, which was the hall of the chapter, and where the vocal mothers
tests/les_miserables.txt:26872:were probably assembled. Fauchelevent was left alone.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26881:herself once more on her chair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26883:The two interlocutors seemed preoccupied. We will present a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26884:stenographic report of the dialogue which then ensued, to the best of
tests/les_miserables.txt:26893:“Do you know the chapel?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26896:“I have a little cage there, where I hear the mass and the offices.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26899:“And you have been in the choir in pursuance of your duties?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26911:“The slab of the pavement which is at the side of the altar.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26914:“The slab which closes the vault?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26923:“Mother Ascension, who is as strong as a man, will help you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26929:“We have only a woman here to help you. Each one does what he can.
tests/les_miserables.txt:26930:Because Dom Mabillon gives four hundred and seventeen epistles of Saint
tests/les_miserables.txt:26938:“Merit consists in working according to one’s strength. A cloister is
tests/les_miserables.txt:26939:not a dock-yard.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26945:“And can you get a lever?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26963:“And the four Mother Precentors will help you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26969:“It must be closed again.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26981:“Fauvent, we have confidence in you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26987:“And to hold your peace about everything!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:26996:“I will close it again.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27008:A silence ensued. The prioress, after a pout of the under lip which
tests/les_miserables.txt:27026:“Nothing can be heard at the bottom of the garden.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27032:“I can hardly distinguish my own signal.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27038:“And then, the wind did not blow in my direction this morning.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27041:“It was Mother Crucifixion. A blessed woman.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27048:merely from having seen Mother Crucifixion at prayer.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27054:“The mothers have taken her to the dead-room, which opens on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27055:church.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27061:“No other man than you can or must enter that chamber. See to that. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:27096:At that moment, nine o’clock struck.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27098:“At nine o’clock in the morning and at all hours, praised and adored be
tests/les_miserables.txt:27099:the most Holy Sacrament of the altar,” said the prioress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27101:“Amen,” said Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27103:The clock struck opportunely. It cut “more often” short. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:27104:probable, that had it not been for this, the prioress and Fauchelevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:27107:Fauchelevent mopped his forehead.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27109:The prioress indulged in another little inward murmur, probably sacred,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27110:then raised her voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27112:“In her lifetime, Mother Crucifixion made converts; after her death,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27113:she will perform miracles.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27116:“She will!” replied Father Fauchelevent, falling into step, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27117:striving not to flinch again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27119:“Father Fauvent, the community has been blessed in Mother Crucifixion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27122:to God, while pronouncing these words: _Hanc igitur oblationem_. But
tests/les_miserables.txt:27123:without attaining to such happiness, Mother Crucifixion’s death was
tests/les_miserables.txt:27124:very precious. She retained her consciousness to the very last moment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27126:commands. If you had a little more faith, and if you could have been in
tests/les_miserables.txt:27127:her cell, she would have cured your leg merely by touching it. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:27132:Fauchelevent thought that it was an orison which she was finishing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27139:The prioress took off several beads of her chaplet. Fauchelevent held
tests/les_miserables.txt:27140:his peace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27144:“I have consulted upon this point many ecclesiastics laboring in Our
tests/les_miserables.txt:27145:Lord, who occupy themselves in the exercises of the clerical life, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27149:“Reverend Mother, you can hear the knell much better here than in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27159:“She slept in her coffin for twenty years, by express permission of our
tests/les_miserables.txt:27163:“The one who crowned the Emp—Buonaparte.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27166:For a clever man like Fauchelevent, this allusion was an awkward one.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27167:Fortunately, the prioress, completely absorbed in her own thoughts, did
tests/les_miserables.txt:27168:not hear it. She continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27176:“Saint Didorus, Archbishop of Cappadocia, desired that this single word
tests/les_miserables.txt:27177:might be inscribed on his tomb: _Acarus_, which signifies, a worm of
tests/les_miserables.txt:27184:“The blessed Mezzocane, Abbot of Aquila, wished to be buried beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:27193:which was placed on the graves of parricides, in the hope that
tests/les_miserables.txt:27201:“The body of Bernard Guidonis, born in France near Roche-Abeille, was,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27203:church of the Dominicans in Limoges, although Bernard Guidonis was
tests/les_miserables.txt:27204:Bishop of Tuy in Spain. Can the contrary be affirmed?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27210:“The fact is attested by Plantavit de la Fosse.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27213:Several beads of the chaplet were told off, still in silence. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:27216:“Father Fauvent, Mother Crucifixion will be interred in the coffin in
tests/les_miserables.txt:27217:which she has slept for the last twenty years.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27223:“It is a continuation of her slumber.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27226:“So I shall have to nail up that coffin?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27232:“And we are to reject the undertaker’s coffin?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27235:“Precisely.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27238:“I am at the orders of the very reverend community.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27241:“The four Mother Precentors will assist you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27244:“In nailing up the coffin? I do not need them.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27247:“No. In lowering the coffin.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27262:Fauchelevent started.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27286:the chapel, not to go to profane earth; to remain there in death where
tests/les_miserables.txt:27287:she prayed while living; such was the last wish of Mother Crucifixion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27288:She asked it of us; that is to say, commanded us.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27297:“What if it became known?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27300:“We have confidence in you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27306:“The chapter assembled. The vocal mothers, whom I have just consulted
tests/les_miserables.txt:27307:again, and who are now deliberating, have decided that Mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:27308:Crucifixion shall be buried, according to her wish, in her own coffin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27309:under our altar. Think, Father Fauvent, if she were to work miracles
tests/les_miserables.txt:27310:here! What a glory of God for the community! And miracles issue from
tests/les_miserables.txt:27314:“But, reverend Mother, if the agent of the sanitary commission—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27321:“But the commissary of police—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27325:Gauls under the Empire of Constantius, expressly recognized the right
tests/les_miserables.txt:27329:“But the inspector from the Prefecture—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27332:“The world is nothing in the presence of the cross. Martin, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27333:eleventh general of the Carthusians, gave to his order this device:
tests/les_miserables.txt:27334:_Stat crux dum volvitur orbis_.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27337:“Amen,” said Fauchelevent, who imperturbably extricated himself in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:27340:Any audience suffices for a person who has held his peace too long. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:27341:the day when the rhetorician Gymnastoras left his prison, bearing in
tests/les_miserables.txt:27342:his body many dilemmas and numerous syllogisms which had struck in, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:27343:halted in front of the first tree which he came to, harangued it and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27344:made very great efforts to convince it. The prioress, who was usually
tests/les_miserables.txt:27345:subjected to the barrier of silence, and whose reservoir was overfull,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27346:rose and exclaimed with the loquacity of a dam which has broken away:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27349:first abbot of Clairvaux. Fontaines in Burgundy is a country that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:27350:blest because it gave him birth. His father was named Técelin, and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:27353:Champeaux; he had seven hundred novices, and founded a hundred and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27354:sixty monasteries; he overthrew Abeilard at the council of Sens in
tests/les_miserables.txt:27355:1140, and Pierre de Bruys and Henry his disciple, and another sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:27356:erring spirits who were called the Apostolics; he confounded Arnauld de
tests/les_miserables.txt:27357:Brescia, darted lightning at the monk Raoul, the murderer of the Jews,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27358:dominated the council of Reims in 1148, caused the condemnation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:27359:Gilbert de Poréa, Bishop of Poitiers, caused the condemnation of Éon de
tests/les_miserables.txt:27360:l’Étoile, arranged the disputes of princes, enlightened King Louis the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27361:Young, advised Pope Eugene III., regulated the Temple, preached the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27362:crusade, performed two hundred and fifty miracles during his lifetime,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27364:patriarch of Mont-Cassin; he was the second founder of the Sainteté
tests/les_miserables.txt:27365:Claustrale, he was the Basil of the West. His order has produced forty
tests/les_miserables.txt:27366:popes, two hundred cardinals, fifty patriarchs, sixteen hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:27367:archbishops, four thousand six hundred bishops, four emperors, twelve
tests/les_miserables.txt:27369:hundred canonized saints, and has been in existence for fourteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:27372:inspector of public ways! The state, the road commissioners, the public
tests/les_miserables.txt:27374:that? There is not a chance passer-by who would not be indignant to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:27377:God subordinated to the commissary of police; such is the age. Silence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27381:Fauchelevent was but ill at ease under this shower bath. The prioress
tests/les_miserables.txt:27382:continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27384:“No one doubts the right of the monastery to sepulture. Only fanatics
tests/les_miserables.txt:27385:and those in error deny it. We live in times of terrible confusion. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:27386:do not know that which it is necessary to know, and we know that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:27389:the Saint Bernard denominated of the poor Catholics, a certain good
tests/les_miserables.txt:27390:ecclesiastic who lived in the thirteenth century. Others are so
tests/les_miserables.txt:27391:blasphemous as to compare the scaffold of Louis XVI. to the cross of
tests/les_miserables.txt:27396:arch-bishop, the Cardinal de Périgord, did not even know that Charles
tests/les_miserables.txt:27397:de Gondren succeeded to Berulle, and François Bourgoin to Gondren, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27399:Jean-François Senault. The name of Father Coton is known, not because
tests/les_miserables.txt:27401:because he furnished Henri IV., the Huguenot king, with the material
tests/les_miserables.txt:27402:for an oath. That which pleases people of the world in Saint François
tests/les_miserables.txt:27403:de Sales, is that he cheated at play. And then, religion is attacked.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27404:Why? Because there have been bad priests, because Sagittaire, Bishop of
tests/les_miserables.txt:27405:Gap, was the brother of Salone, Bishop of Embrun, and because both of
tests/les_miserables.txt:27408:cloak to a beggar? They persecute the saints. They shut their eyes to
tests/les_miserables.txt:27409:the truth. Darkness is the rule. The most ferocious beasts are beasts
tests/les_miserables.txt:27410:which are blind. No one thinks of hell as a reality. Oh! how wicked
tests/les_miserables.txt:27413:dead. A holy death is prohibited. Burial is a civil matter. This is
tests/les_miserables.txt:27414:horrible. Saint Leo II. wrote two special letters, one to Pierre
tests/les_miserables.txt:27416:combating and rejecting, in questions touching the dead, the authority
tests/les_miserables.txt:27417:of the exarch and the supremacy of the Emperor. Gauthier, Bishop of
tests/les_miserables.txt:27419:The ancient magistracy agreed with him. In former times we had voices
tests/les_miserables.txt:27420:in the chapter, even on matters of the day. The Abbot of Cîteaux, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27421:general of the order, was councillor by right of birth to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27423:body of Saint Benoît himself in France, in the abbey of Fleury, called
tests/les_miserables.txt:27425:Saturday, the 21st of the month of March, of the year 543? All this is
tests/les_miserables.txt:27426:incontestable. I abhor psalm-singers, I hate priors, I execrate
tests/les_miserables.txt:27427:heretics, but I should detest yet more any one who should maintain the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27428:contrary. One has only to read Arnoul Wion, Gabriel Bucelin, Trithemus,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27429:Maurolics, and Dom Luc d’Achery.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27432:The prioress took breath, then turned to Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27449:“I am entirely devoted to the convent.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27452:“That is understood. You will close the coffin. The sisters will carry
tests/les_miserables.txt:27453:it to the chapel. The office for the dead will then be said. Then we
tests/les_miserables.txt:27454:shall return to the cloister. Between eleven o’clock and midnight, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:27455:will come with your iron bar. All will be done in the most profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:27456:secrecy. There will be in the chapel only the four Mother Precentors,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27457:Mother Ascension and yourself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27469:“She will not listen. Besides, what the cloister knows the world learns
tests/les_miserables.txt:27475:“You will remove your bell. It is not necessary that the sister at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27476:post should perceive your presence.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27485:“Has the doctor for the dead paid his visit?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27488:“He will pay it at four o’clock to-day. The peal which orders the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27489:doctor for the dead to be summoned has already been rung. But you do
tests/les_miserables.txt:27505:“Where gratings are not lacking, iron bars are not lacking. I have my
tests/les_miserables.txt:27519:the strong man for you. A perfect Turk!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27525:“I cannot work very fast. I am infirm; that is why I require an
tests/les_miserables.txt:27530:II., who combated Antipope Gregory and re-established Benoît VIII., has
tests/les_miserables.txt:27534:“Two surtouts are a good thing,” murmured Fauchelevent, who really was
tests/les_miserables.txt:27538:it. That is not too much. Be near the principal altar, with your iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:27539:bar, at eleven o’clock. The office begins at midnight. Everything must
tests/les_miserables.txt:27540:have been completed a good quarter of an hour before that.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27543:“I will do anything to prove my zeal towards the community. These are
tests/les_miserables.txt:27544:my orders. I am to nail up the coffin. At eleven o’clock exactly, I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:27545:to be in the chapel. The Mother Precentors will be there. Mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:27546:Ascension will be there. Two men would be better. However, never mind!
tests/les_miserables.txt:27548:coffin, and we will close the vault again. After which, there will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:27549:no trace of anything. The government will have no suspicion. Thus all
tests/les_miserables.txt:27559:“The empty coffin remains.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27562:This produced a pause. Fauchelevent meditated. The prioress meditated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27564:“What is to be done with that coffin, Father Fauvent?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27573:Another silence. Fauchelevent made, with his left hand, that sort of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:27574:gesture which dismisses a troublesome subject.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27576:“Reverend Mother, I am the one who is to nail up the coffin in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27577:basement of the church, and no one can enter there but myself, and I
tests/les_miserables.txt:27578:will cover the coffin with the pall.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27581:“Yes, but the bearers, when they place it in the hearse and lower it
tests/les_miserables.txt:27585:“Ah! the de—!” exclaimed Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27587:The prioress began to make the sign of the cross, and looked fixedly at
tests/les_miserables.txt:27588:the gardener. The _vil_ stuck fast in his throat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27592:“I will put earth in the coffin, reverend Mother. That will produce the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27593:effect of a corpse.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27597:manage the empty coffin?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27600:“I will make that my special business.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27603:The prioress’s face, up to that moment troubled and clouded, grew
tests/les_miserables.txt:27604:serene once more. She made the sign of a superior dismissing an
tests/les_miserables.txt:27605:inferior to him. Fauchelevent went towards the door. As he was on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27606:point of passing out, the prioress raised her voice gently:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27609:to-morrow, after the burial, and tell him to fetch his daughter.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27619:The strides of a lame man are like the ogling glances of a one-eyed
tests/les_miserables.txt:27620:man; they do not reach their goal very promptly. Moreover, Fauchelevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:27622:cottage in the garden. Cosette had waked up. Jean Valjean had placed
tests/les_miserables.txt:27623:her near the fire. At the moment when Fauchelevent entered, Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:27627:happy here. The good man who lives here is going to carry you off on
tests/les_miserables.txt:27628:his back in that. You will wait for me at a lady’s house. I shall come
tests/les_miserables.txt:27629:to fetch you. Obey, and say nothing, above all things, unless you want
tests/les_miserables.txt:27635:Jean Valjean turned round at the noise made by Fauchelevent opening the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27641:“Everything is arranged, and nothing is,” said Fauchelevent. “I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:27643:out. That’s where the difficulty lies. It is easy enough with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27644:child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27647:“You will carry her out?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27659:And, after a silence, fraught with anxiety, Fauchelevent exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27661:“Why, get out as you came in!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27664:Jean Valjean, as in the first instance, contented himself with saying,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27668:Fauchelevent grumbled, more to himself than to Jean Valjean:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27670:“There is another thing which bothers me. I have said that I would put
tests/les_miserables.txt:27671:earth in it. When I come to think it over, the earth instead of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27672:corpse will not seem like the real thing, it won’t do, it will get
tests/les_miserables.txt:27673:displaced, it will move about. The men will bear it. You understand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27674:Father Madeleine, the government will notice it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27680:Fauchelevent went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27682:“How the de—uce are you going to get out? It must all be done by
tests/les_miserables.txt:27684:prioress expects you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27687:Then he explained to Jean Valjean that this was his recompense for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:27688:service which he, Fauchelevent, was to render to the community. That it
tests/les_miserables.txt:27690:the coffins and helped the grave-digger at the cemetery. That the nun
tests/les_miserables.txt:27691:who had died that morning had requested to be buried in the coffin
tests/les_miserables.txt:27692:which had served her for a bed, and interred in the vault under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27693:altar of the chapel. That the police regulations forbade this, but that
tests/les_miserables.txt:27695:and the vocal mothers intended to fulfil the wish of the deceased. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:27696:it was so much the worse for the government. That he, Fauchelevent, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:27697:to nail up the coffin in the cell, raise the stone in the chapel, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27698:lower the corpse into the vault. And that, by way of thanks, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27700:niece as a pupil. That his brother was M. Madeleine, and that his niece
tests/les_miserables.txt:27702:following evening, after the counterfeit interment in the cemetery. But
tests/les_miserables.txt:27703:that he could not bring M. Madeleine in from the outside if M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27705:that there was another: the empty coffin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27707:“What is that empty coffin?” asked Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27709:Fauchelevent replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27711:“The coffin of the administration.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27714:“What coffin? What administration?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27717:“A nun dies. The municipal doctor comes and says, ‘A nun has died.’ The
tests/les_miserables.txt:27718:government sends a coffin. The next day it sends a hearse and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27719:undertaker’s men to get the coffin and carry it to the cemetery. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:27720:undertaker’s men will come and lift the coffin; there will be nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:27727:“A corpse? I have none.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27744:Fauchelevent, who was seated, sprang up as though a bomb had burst
tests/les_miserables.txt:27745:under his chair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27753:Jean Valjean gave way to one of those rare smiles which lighted up his
tests/les_miserables.txt:27754:face like a flash from heaven in the winter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27756:“You know, Fauchelevent, what you have said: ‘Mother Crucifixion is
tests/les_miserables.txt:27760:“Ah! good, you can laugh, you are not speaking seriously.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27763:“Very seriously, I must get out of this place.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27769:“l have told you to find a basket, and a cover for me also.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27775:“The basket will be of pine, and the cover a black cloth.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27778:“In the first place, it will be a white cloth. Nuns are buried in
tests/les_miserables.txt:27782:“Let it be a white cloth, then.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27788:To behold such devices, which are nothing else than the savage and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27789:daring inventions of the galleys, spring forth from the peaceable
tests/les_miserables.txt:27790:things which surrounded him, and mingle with what he called the “petty
tests/les_miserables.txt:27791:course of life in the convent,” caused Fauchelevent as much amazement
tests/les_miserables.txt:27798:means. But give me some information, in the first place. How is it
tests/les_miserables.txt:27799:managed? Where is this coffin?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27808:“Downstairs, in what is called the dead-room. It stands on two
tests/les_miserables.txt:27812:“How long is the coffin?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27821:“It is a chamber on the ground floor which has a grated window opening
tests/les_miserables.txt:27822:on the garden, which is closed on the outside by a shutter, and two
tests/les_miserables.txt:27823:doors; one leads into the convent, the other into the church.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27826:“What church?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27829:“The church in the street, the church which any one can enter.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27835:“No; I have the key to the door which communicates with the convent;
tests/les_miserables.txt:27836:the porter has the key to the door which communicates with the church.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27842:“Only to allow the undertaker’s men to enter, when they come to get the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27843:coffin. When the coffin has been taken out, the door is closed again.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27846:“Who nails up the coffin?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27861:“Not another man, except the police doctor, can enter the dead-room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27868:“No. But I could hide you in a small, dark nook which opens on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27869:dead-room, where I keep my tools to use for burials, and of which I
tests/les_miserables.txt:27873:“At what time will the hearse come for the coffin to-morrow?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27876:“About three o’clock in the afternoon. The burial will take place at
tests/les_miserables.txt:27877:the Vaugirard cemetery a little before nightfall. It is not very near.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27880:“I will remain concealed in your tool-closet all night and all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27887:“You can come and nail me up in the coffin at two o’clock.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27890:Fauchelevent recoiled and cracked his finger-joints.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27898:What seemed unprecedented to Fauchelevent was, we repeat, a simple
tests/les_miserables.txt:27900:this. Any man who has been a prisoner understands how to contract
tests/les_miserables.txt:27901:himself to fit the diameter of the escape. The prisoner is subject to
tests/les_miserables.txt:27902:flight as the sick man is subject to a crisis which saves or kills him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27903:An escape is a cure. What does not a man undergo for the sake of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:27904:cure? To have himself nailed up in a case and carried off like a bale
tests/les_miserables.txt:27906:none, to economize his breath for hours, to know how to stifle without
tests/les_miserables.txt:27909:Moreover, a coffin containing a living being,—that convict’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:27910:expedient,—is also an imperial expedient. If we are to credit the monk
tests/les_miserables.txt:27912:desirous of seeing the Plombes for the last time after his abdication.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27914:He had her brought into and carried out of the monastery of Saint-Yuste
tests/les_miserables.txt:27917:Fauchelevent, who had recovered himself a little, exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:27925:“In that box! The mere thought of it suffocates me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27932:“Good! And what if you should happen to cough or to sneeze?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27935:“A man who is making his escape does not cough or sneeze.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27940:“Father Fauchelevent, we must come to a decision: I must either be
tests/les_miserables.txt:27941:caught here, or accept this escape through the hearse.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27944:Every one has noticed the taste which cats have for pausing and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27946:has not said to a cat, “Do come in!” There are men who, when an
tests/les_miserables.txt:27947:incident stands half-open before them, have the same tendency to halt
tests/les_miserables.txt:27948:in indecision between two resolutions, at the risk of getting crushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:27949:through the abrupt closing of the adventure by fate. The over-prudent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27950:cats as they are, and because they are cats, sometimes incur more
tests/les_miserables.txt:27951:danger than the audacious. Fauchelevent was of this hesitating nature.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27952:But Jean Valjean’s coolness prevailed over him in spite of himself. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:27955:“Well, since there is no other means.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27960:“The only thing which troubles me is what will take place at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:27961:cemetery.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27964:“That is the very point that is not troublesome,” exclaimed
tests/les_miserables.txt:27965:Fauchelevent. “If you are sure of coming out of the coffin all right, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:27968:of the old school. The grave-digger puts the corpses in the grave, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:27969:I put the grave-digger in my pocket. I will tell you what will take
tests/les_miserables.txt:27970:place. They will arrive a little before dusk, three-quarters of an hour
tests/les_miserables.txt:27971:before the gates of the cemetery are closed. The hearse will drive
tests/les_miserables.txt:27972:directly up to the grave. I shall follow; that is my business. I shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:27973:have a hammer, a chisel, and some pincers in my pocket. The hearse
tests/les_miserables.txt:27974:halts, the undertaker’s men knot a rope around your coffin and lower
tests/les_miserables.txt:27975:you down. The priest says the prayers, makes the sign of the cross,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27980:[the Good Quince] is open.’ I carry him off, I get him drunk,—it does
tests/les_miserables.txt:27982:beginning of it about him,—I lay him under the table, I take his card,
tests/les_miserables.txt:27983:so that I can get into the cemetery again, and I return without him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27989:Jean Valjean held out his hand, and Fauchelevent precipitated himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:27990:upon it with the touching effusion of a peasant.
tests/les_miserables.txt:27992:“That is settled, Father Fauchelevent. All will go well.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:27995:“Provided nothing goes wrong,” thought Fauchelevent. “In that case, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:28005:On the following day, as the sun was declining, the very rare
tests/les_miserables.txt:28007:old-fashioned hearse, ornamented with skulls, cross-bones, and tears.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28008:This hearse contained a coffin covered with a white cloth over which
tests/les_miserables.txt:28009:spread a large black cross, like a huge corpse with drooping arms. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:28010:mourning-coach, in which could be seen a priest in his surplice, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28011:choir boy in his red cap, followed. Two undertaker’s men in gray
tests/les_miserables.txt:28012:uniforms trimmed with black walked on the right and the left of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28013:hearse. Behind it came an old man in the garments of a laborer, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:28014:limped along. The procession was going in the direction of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28015:Vaugirard cemetery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28017:The handle of a hammer, the blade of a cold chisel, and the antennæ of
tests/les_miserables.txt:28018:a pair of pincers were visible, protruding from the man’s pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28020:The Vaugirard cemetery formed an exception among the cemeteries of
tests/les_miserables.txt:28021:Paris. It had its peculiar usages, just as it had its carriage entrance
tests/les_miserables.txt:28022:and its house door, which old people in the quarter, who clung
tests/les_miserables.txt:28023:tenaciously to ancient words, still called the _porte cavalière_ and
tests/les_miserables.txt:28024:the _porte piétonne_.16 The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:28025:Petit-Picpus had obtained permission, as we have already stated, to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:28026:buried there in a corner apart, and at night, the plot of land having
tests/les_miserables.txt:28027:formerly belonged to their community. The grave-diggers being thus
tests/les_miserables.txt:28028:bound to service in the evening in summer and at night in winter, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:28029:this cemetery, they were subjected to a special discipline. The gates
tests/les_miserables.txt:28030:of the Paris cemeteries closed, at that epoch, at sundown, and this
tests/les_miserables.txt:28031:being a municipal regulation, the Vaugirard cemetery was bound by it
tests/les_miserables.txt:28032:like the rest. The carriage gate and the house door were two contiguous
tests/les_miserables.txt:28033:grated gates, adjoining a pavilion built by the architect Perronet, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:28034:inhabited by the door-keeper of the cemetery. These gates, therefore,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28037:delayed after that moment in the cemetery, there was but one way for
tests/les_miserables.txt:28038:him to get out—his grave-digger’s card furnished by the department of
tests/les_miserables.txt:28039:public funerals. A sort of letter-box was constructed in the porter’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:28040:window. The grave-digger dropped his card into this box, the porter
tests/les_miserables.txt:28042:had not his card, he mentioned his name, the porter, who was sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:28043:in bed and asleep, rose, came out and identified the man, and opened
tests/les_miserables.txt:28045:fine of fifteen francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28047:This cemetery, with its peculiarities outside the regulations,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28049:little later than 1830. The cemetery of Mont-Parnasse, called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28050:Eastern cemetery, succeeded to it, and inherited that famous dram-shop
tests/les_miserables.txt:28051:next to the Vaugirard cemetery, which was surmounted by a quince
tests/les_miserables.txt:28052:painted on a board, and which formed an angle, one side on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28056:The Vaugirard cemetery was what may be called a faded cemetery. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:28058:deserting it. The bourgeois did not care much about being buried in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28059:Vaugirard; it hinted at poverty. Père-Lachaise if you please! to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:28060:buried in Père-Lachaise is equivalent to having furniture of mahogany.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28061:It is recognized as elegant. The Vaugirard cemetery was a venerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:28062:enclosure, planted like an old-fashioned French garden. Straight
tests/les_miserables.txt:28063:alleys, box, thuya-trees, holly, ancient tombs beneath aged
tests/les_miserables.txt:28064:cypress-trees, and very tall grass. In the evening it was tragic there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28068:black cross entered the avenue of the Vaugirard cemetery. The lame man
tests/les_miserables.txt:28069:who followed it was no other than Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28071:The interment of Mother Crucifixion in the vault under the altar, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28072:exit of Cosette, the introduction of Jean Valjean to the dead-room,—all
tests/les_miserables.txt:28073:had been executed without difficulty, and there had been no hitch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28075:Let us remark in passing, that the burial of Mother Crucifixion under
tests/les_miserables.txt:28076:the altar of the convent is a perfectly venial offence in our sight. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:28077:is one of the faults which resemble a duty. The nuns had committed it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28078:not only without difficulty, but even with the applause of their own
tests/les_miserables.txt:28079:consciences. In the cloister, what is called the “government” is only
tests/les_miserables.txt:28080:an intermeddling with authority, an interference which is always
tests/les_miserables.txt:28081:questionable. In the first place, the rule; as for the code, we shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:28084:the tribute to God. A prince is nothing in the presence of a principle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28086:Fauchelevent limped along behind the hearse in a very contented frame
tests/les_miserables.txt:28088:convent, the other against it, the other with M. Madeleine, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:28089:succeeded, to all appearance. Jean Valjean’s composure was one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:28090:powerful tranquillities which are contagious. Fauchelevent no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:28091:felt doubtful as to his success.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28094:he had made good Father Mestienne, a chubby-cheeked person, drunk at
tests/les_miserables.txt:28096:with him. He made him dance according to his whim. Mestienne’s head
tests/les_miserables.txt:28097:adjusted itself to the cap of Fauchelevent’s will. Fauchelevent’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:28098:confidence was perfect.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28100:At the moment when the convoy entered the avenue leading to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28101:cemetery, Fauchelevent glanced cheerfully at the hearse, and said half
tests/les_miserables.txt:28104:“Here’s a fine farce!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28107:All at once the hearse halted; it had reached the gate. The permission
tests/les_miserables.txt:28109:to the porter of the cemetery. During this colloquy, which always is
tests/les_miserables.txt:28110:productive of a delay of from one to two minutes, some one, a stranger,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28111:came and placed himself behind the hearse, beside Fauchelevent. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:28112:a sort of laboring man, who wore a waistcoat with large pockets and
tests/les_miserables.txt:28113:carried a mattock under his arm.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28115:Fauchelevent surveyed this stranger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28124:If a man could survive the blow of a cannon-ball full in the breast, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:28125:would make the same face that Fauchelevent made.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28151:Fauchelevent had expected anything but this, that a grave-digger could
tests/les_miserables.txt:28153:dint of excavating graves for other people, one hollows out one’s own.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28155:Fauchelevent stood there with his mouth wide open. He had hardly the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28171:Fauchelevent, who was deadly pale, stared at this Gribier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28174:unsuccessful doctor who had turned grave-digger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28176:Fauchelevent burst out laughing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28183:comrade? We’ll go and have a drink together presently.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28192:cemetery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28194:Fauchelevent had slackened his pace. He limped more out of anxiety than
tests/les_miserables.txt:28199:Fauchelevent passed the unexpected Gribier once more in review.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28204:“Comrade!” cried Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28208:“I am the convent grave-digger.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28211:“My colleague,” said the man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28213:Fauchelevent, who was illiterate but very sharp, understood that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:28214:to deal with a formidable species of man, with a fine talker. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:28222:“Completely. The good God consulted his note-book which shows when the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28226:Fauchelevent repeated mechanically: “The good God—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28229:“The good God,” said the man authoritatively. “According to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28230:philosophers, the Eternal Father; according to the Jacobins, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28234:“Shall we not make each other’s acquaintance?” stammered Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28239:“People do not know each other until they have drunk together. He who
tests/les_miserables.txt:28240:empties his glass empties his heart. You must come and have a drink
tests/les_miserables.txt:28241:with me. Such a thing cannot be refused.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28247:Fauchelevent thought: “I am lost.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28251:leading to the nuns’ corner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28255:“Peasant, I have seven small children who must be fed. As they must
tests/les_miserables.txt:28256:eat, I cannot drink.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28259:And he added, with the satisfaction of a serious man who is turning a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28265:The hearse skirted a clump of cypress-trees, quitted the grand alley,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28267:thicket. This indicated the immediate proximity of the place of
tests/les_miserables.txt:28268:sepulture. Fauchelevent slackened his pace, but he could not detain the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28269:hearse. Fortunately, the soil, which was light and wet with the winter
tests/les_miserables.txt:28270:rains, clogged the wheels and retarded its speed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28272:He approached the grave-digger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28274:“They have such a nice little Argenteuil wine,” murmured Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28278:literature. But he had reverses. He had losses on ’change. I was
tests/les_miserables.txt:28279:obliged to renounce the profession of author. But I am still a public
tests/les_miserables.txt:28283:“So you are not a grave-digger, then?” returned Fauchelevent, clutching
tests/les_miserables.txt:28284:at this branch, feeble as it was.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28286:“The one does not hinder the other. I cumulate.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28289:Fauchelevent did not understand this last word.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28293:Here a remark becomes necessary. Fauchelevent, whatever his anguish,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28295:to pay? Generally, Fauchelevent offered and Father Mestienne paid. An
tests/les_miserables.txt:28296:offer of a drink was the evident result of the novel situation created
tests/les_miserables.txt:28297:by the new grave-digger, and it was necessary to make this offer, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:28300:Fauchelevent did not wish to pay, troubled as he was.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28304:“One must eat. I have accepted Father Mestienne’s reversion. One gets
tests/les_miserables.txt:28305:to be a philosopher when one has nearly completed his classes. To the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28306:labor of the hand I join the labor of the arm. I have my scrivener’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:28308:Market. All the cooks of the Red Cross apply to me. I scribble their
tests/les_miserables.txt:28309:declarations of love to the raw soldiers. In the morning I write love
tests/les_miserables.txt:28310:letters; in the evening I dig graves. Such is life, rustic.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28313:The hearse was still advancing. Fauchelevent, uneasy to the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:28315:trickled down from his brow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28317:“But,” continued the grave-digger, “a man cannot serve two mistresses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28318:I must choose between the pen and the mattock. The mattock is ruining
tests/les_miserables.txt:28324:The choir boy alighted from the mourning-coach, then the priest.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28327:pile of earth, beyond which an open grave was visible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28329:“What a farce this is!” repeated Fauchelevent in consternation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28337:Who was in the coffin? The reader knows. Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28339:Jean Valjean had arranged things so that he could exist there, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:28340:could almost breathe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28342:It is a strange thing to what a degree security of conscience confers
tests/les_miserables.txt:28343:security of the rest. Every combination thought out by Jean Valjean had
tests/les_miserables.txt:28344:been progressing, and progressing favorably, since the preceding day.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28345:He, like Fauchelevent, counted on Father Mestienne. He had no doubt as
tests/les_miserables.txt:28346:to the end. Never was there a more critical situation, never more
tests/les_miserables.txt:28347:complete composure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28349:The four planks of the coffin breathe out a kind of terrible peace. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:28353:From the depths of that coffin he had been able to follow, and he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:28354:followed, all the phases of the terrible drama which he was playing
tests/les_miserables.txt:28357:Shortly after Fauchelevent had finished nailing on the upper plank,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28358:Jean Valjean had felt himself carried out, then driven off. He knew,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28360:reached the earth road. He had divined, from a dull noise, that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:28361:were crossing the bridge of Austerlitz. At the first halt, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:28362:understood that they were entering the cemetery; at the second halt, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:28368:Suddenly, he felt hands seize the coffin, then a harsh grating against
tests/les_miserables.txt:28369:the planks; he explained it to himself as the rope which was being
tests/les_miserables.txt:28370:fastened round the casket in order to lower it into the cavity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28372:Then he experienced a giddiness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28375:coffin to lose its balance, and had lowered the head before the foot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28376:He recovered himself fully when he felt himself horizontal and
tests/les_miserables.txt:28377:motionless. He had just touched the bottom.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28379:He had a certain sensation of cold.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28381:A voice rose above him, glacial and solemn. He heard Latin words, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:28383:catch them one by one:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28388:A child’s voice said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28392:The grave voice began again:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28396:The child’s voice responded:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28398:_“Et lux perpetua luceat ei.” _
tests/les_miserables.txt:28401:the plank which covered him. It was probably the holy water.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28403:He thought: “This will be over soon now. Patience for a little while
tests/les_miserables.txt:28404:longer. The priest will take his departure. Fauchelevent will take
tests/les_miserables.txt:28405:Mestienne off to drink. I shall be left. Then Fauchelevent will return
tests/les_miserables.txt:28409:The grave voice resumed
tests/les_miserables.txt:28411:_“Requiescat in pace.” _
tests/les_miserables.txt:28413:And the child’s voice said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28423:All at once, he heard over his head a sound which seemed to him to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28424:clap of thunder.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28426:It was a shovelful of earth falling on the coffin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28428:A second shovelful fell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28430:One of the holes through which he breathed had just been stopped up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28436:There are things which are too strong for the strongest man. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:28437:Valjean lost consciousness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28446:This is what had taken place above the coffin in which lay Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:28449:When the hearse had driven off, when the priest and the choir boy had
tests/les_miserables.txt:28450:entered the carriage again and taken their departure, Fauchelevent, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:28452:and grasp his shovel, which was sticking upright in the heap of dirt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28454:Then Fauchelevent took a supreme resolve.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28456:He placed himself between the grave and the grave-digger, crossed his
tests/les_miserables.txt:28467:Fauchelevent repeated:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28492:And he flung a shovelful of earth on the coffin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28494:The coffin gave back a hollow sound. Fauchelevent felt himself stagger
tests/les_miserables.txt:28496:in a voice in which the strangling sound of the death rattle began to
tests/les_miserables.txt:28502:The grave-digger took some more earth on his shovel. Fauchelevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:28503:continued.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28510:“Listen to me, comrade. I am the convent grave-digger, I have come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:28511:help you. It is a business which can be performed at night. Let us
tests/les_miserables.txt:28515:And as he spoke, and clung to this desperate insistence, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:28516:melancholy reflection occurred to him: “And if he drinks, will he get
tests/les_miserables.txt:28520:“Provincial,” said the man, “if you positively insist upon it, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:28521:consent. We will drink. After work, never before.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28524:And he flourished his shovel briskly. Fauchelevent held him back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28529:“Oh, come,” said the grave-digger, “you are a bell-ringer. Ding dong,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28533:And he threw in a second shovelful.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28535:Fauchelevent had reached a point where he no longer knew what he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:28538:“Come along and drink,” he cried, “since it is I who pays the bill.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28541:“When we have put the child to bed,” said the grave-digger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28547:“It’s cold to-night, you see, and the corpse would shriek out after us
tests/les_miserables.txt:28548:if we were to plant her there without a coverlet.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28552:and the pocket of his waistcoat gaped. Fauchelevent’s wild gaze fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:28553:mechanically into that pocket, and there it stopped.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28557:that yawning pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28559:The sum total of lightning that the eye of a Picard peasant can
tests/les_miserables.txt:28560:contain, traversed Fauchelevent’s pupils. An idea had just occurred to
tests/les_miserables.txt:28563:He thrust his hand into the pocket from behind, without the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28565:observing it, and pulled out the white object which lay at the bottom
tests/les_miserables.txt:28570:Just as he turned round to get the fifth, Fauchelevent looked calmly at
tests/les_miserables.txt:28573:“By the way, you new man, have you your card?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28578:“What card?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28584:“That’s good, it is going to put on its nightcap.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28587:“The gate of the cemetery will close immediately.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28593:“Have you your card?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28596:“Ah! my card?” said the grave-digger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28598:And he fumbled in his pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28600:Having searched one pocket, he proceeded to search the other. He passed
tests/les_miserables.txt:28601:on to his fobs, explored the first, returned to the second.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28603:“Why, no,” said he, “I have not my card. I must have forgotten it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28606:“Fifteen francs fine,” said Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28610:“Ah! Jésus-mon-Dieu-bancroche-à-bas-la-lune!”17 he exclaimed. “Fifteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:28611:francs fine!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28614:“Three pieces of a hundred sous,” said Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28618:Fauchelevent’s turn had come.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28620:“Ah, come now, conscript,” said Fauchelevent, “none of this despair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28621:There is no question of committing suicide and benefiting the grave.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28622:Fifteen francs is fifteen francs, and besides, you may not be able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:28624:the devices. I will give you some friendly advice. One thing is clear,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28625:the sun is on the point of setting, it is touching the dome now, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28626:cemetery will be closed in five minutes more.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28632:as hollow as the devil, this grave, and to reach the gate in season to
tests/les_miserables.txt:28639:“In that case, a fine of fifteen francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28642:“Fifteen francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28648:“A couple of steps from the barrier, a quarter of an hour from here.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28656:“That is exactly so.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28659:“Once outside the gate, you gallop home, you get your card, you return,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28660:the cemetery porter admits you. As you have your card, there will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:28661:nothing to pay. And you will bury your corpse. I’ll watch it for you in
tests/les_miserables.txt:28668:“Decamp!” said Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28673:When the man had disappeared in the thicket, Fauchelevent listened
tests/les_miserables.txt:28674:until he heard his footsteps die away in the distance, then he leaned
tests/les_miserables.txt:28682:Fauchelevent was seized with a shudder. He tumbled rather than climbed
tests/les_miserables.txt:28683:into the grave, flung himself on the head of the coffin and cried:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28688:Silence in the coffin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28690:Fauchelevent, hardly able to draw his breath for trembling, seized his
tests/les_miserables.txt:28691:cold chisel and his hammer, and pried up the coffin lid.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28693:Jean Valjean’s face appeared in the twilight; it was pale and his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:28694:were closed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28696:Fauchelevent’s hair rose upright on his head, he sprang to his feet,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28697:then fell back against the side of the grave, ready to swoon on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28698:coffin. He stared at Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28702:Fauchelevent murmured in a voice as faint as a sigh:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28707:And, drawing himself up, and folding his arms with such violence that
tests/les_miserables.txt:28708:his clenched fists came in contact with his shoulders, he cried:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28719:expecting it? It is he who has killed M. Madeleine. Father Madeleine!
tests/les_miserables.txt:28720:He is in the coffin. It is quite handy. All is over. Now, is there any
tests/les_miserables.txt:28724:think how he put himself under that cart! Father Madeleine! Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:28725:Madeleine! Pardine! He was suffocated, I said so. He wouldn’t believe
tests/les_miserables.txt:28726:me. Well! Here’s a pretty trick to play! He is dead, that good man, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28728:girl! Ah! In the first place, I won’t go back there myself. I shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:28729:stay here. After having done such a thing as that! What’s the use of
tests/les_miserables.txt:28730:being two old men, if we are two old fools! But, in the first place,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28731:how did he manage to enter the convent? That was the beginning of it
tests/les_miserables.txt:28732:all. One should not do such things. Father Madeleine! Father Madeleine!
tests/les_miserables.txt:28734:does not hear me. Now get out of this scrape if you can!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28739:A grating sound became audible through the trees in the distance. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:28740:was the cemetery gate closing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28742:Fauchelevent bent over Jean Valjean, and all at once he bounded back
tests/les_miserables.txt:28743:and recoiled so far as the limits of a grave permit.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28747:To see a corpse is alarming, to behold a resurrection is almost as much
tests/les_miserables.txt:28748:so. Fauchelevent became like stone, pale, haggard, overwhelmed by all
tests/les_miserables.txt:28749:these excesses of emotion, not knowing whether he had to do with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28753:[Illustration: The Resurrection]
tests/les_miserables.txt:28759:Fauchelevent fell on his knees.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28764:Then he sprang to his feet and cried:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28771:Joy is the ebb of terror. Fauchelevent found almost as much difficulty
tests/les_miserables.txt:28772:in recovering himself as Jean Valjean had.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28774:“So you are not dead! Oh! How wise you are! I called you so much that
tests/les_miserables.txt:28775:you came back. When I saw your eyes shut, I said: ‘Good! there he is,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28777:jacket. They would have put me in Bicêtre. What do you suppose I should
tests/les_miserables.txt:28779:fruit-seller,—she would never have understood it! The child is thrust
tests/les_miserables.txt:28785:“I am cold,” said Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28787:This remark recalled Fauchelevent thoroughly to reality, and there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:28789:they had recovered themselves, although they did not realize it, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:28790:there was about them something uncanny, which was the sinister
tests/les_miserables.txt:28791:bewilderment inspired by the place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28793:“Let us get out of here quickly,” exclaimed Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28795:He fumbled in his pocket, and pulled out a gourd with which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:28801:a mouthful of brandy, and regained full possession of his faculties.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28803:He got out of the coffin, and helped Fauchelevent to nail on the lid
tests/les_miserables.txt:28808:Moreover, Fauchelevent was perfectly composed. He took his time. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:28809:cemetery was closed. The arrival of the grave-digger Gribier was not to
tests/les_miserables.txt:28810:be apprehended. That “conscript” was at home busily engaged in looking
tests/les_miserables.txt:28811:for his card, and at some difficulty in finding it in his lodgings,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28812:since it was in Fauchelevent’s pocket. Without a card, he could not get
tests/les_miserables.txt:28813:back into the cemetery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28815:Fauchelevent took the shovel, and Jean Valjean the pick-axe, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:28816:together they buried the empty coffin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28818:When the grave was full, Fauchelevent said to Jean Valjean:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28820:“Let us go. I will keep the shovel; do you carry off the mattock.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28825:Jean Valjean experienced some difficulty in moving and in walking. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:28826:had stiffened himself in that coffin, and had become a little like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28827:corpse. The rigidity of death had seized upon him between those four
tests/les_miserables.txt:28830:“You are benumbed,” said Fauchelevent. “It is a pity that I have a game
tests/les_miserables.txt:28834:“Bah!” replied Jean Valjean, “four paces will put life into my legs
tests/les_miserables.txt:28835:once more.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28838:They set off by the alleys through which the hearse had passed. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:28839:arriving before the closed gate and the porter’s pavilion Fauchelevent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28840:who held the grave-digger’s card in his hand, dropped it into the box,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28843:“How well everything is going!” said Fauchelevent; “what a capital idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:28848:In the neighborhood of the cemetery, a shovel and pick are equal to two
tests/les_miserables.txt:28853:“Father Madeleine,” said Fauchelevent as they went along, and raising
tests/les_miserables.txt:28860:“There is no one in the street,” said Fauchelevent. “Give me your
tests/les_miserables.txt:28861:mattock and wait a couple of minutes for me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28864:Fauchelevent entered No. 87, ascended to the very top, guided by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28865:instinct which always leads the poor man to the garret, and knocked in
tests/les_miserables.txt:28866:the dark, at the door of an attic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28868:A voice replied: “Come in.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28871:It was Gribier’s voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28873:Fauchelevent opened the door. The grave-digger’s dwelling was, like all
tests/les_miserables.txt:28874:such wretched habitations, an unfurnished and encumbered garret. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:28875:packing-case—a coffin, perhaps—took the place of a commode, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28877:a bed, the floor served instead of tables and chairs. In a corner, on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28878:tattered fragment which had been a piece of an old carpet, a thin woman
tests/les_miserables.txt:28879:and a number of children were piled in a heap. The whole of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:28880:poverty-stricken interior bore traces of having been overturned. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:28881:would have said that there had been an earthquake “for one.” The covers
tests/les_miserables.txt:28882:were displaced, the rags scattered about, the jug broken, the mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:28883:had been crying, the children had probably been beaten; traces of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28884:vigorous and ill-tempered search. It was plain that the grave-digger
tests/les_miserables.txt:28885:had made a desperate search for his card, and had made everybody in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28889:But Fauchelevent was in too great a hurry to terminate this adventure
tests/les_miserables.txt:28890:to take any notice of this sad side of his success.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28894:“I have brought you back your shovel and pick.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28897:Gribier gazed at him in stupefaction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28902:“And to-morrow morning you will find your card with the porter of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28903:cemetery.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28906:And he laid the shovel and mattock on the floor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28910:“The meaning of it is, that you dropped your card out of your pocket,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28912:the corpse, that I have filled the grave, that I have done your work,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28913:that the porter will return your card to you, and that you will not
tests/les_miserables.txt:28914:have to pay fifteen francs. There you have it, conscript.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28917:“Thanks, villager!” exclaimed Gribier, radiant. “The next time I will
tests/les_miserables.txt:28927:An hour later, in the darkness of night, two men and a child presented
tests/les_miserables.txt:28928:themselves at No. 62 Rue Petit-Picpus. The elder of the men lifted the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28929:knocker and rapped.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28931:They were Fauchelevent, Jean Valjean, and Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28933:The two old men had gone to fetch Cosette from the fruiterer’s in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28934:Rue du Chemin-Vert, where Fauchelevent had deposited her on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28935:preceding day. Cosette had passed these twenty-four hours trembling
tests/les_miserables.txt:28936:silently and understanding nothing. She trembled to such a degree that
tests/les_miserables.txt:28939:than a melancholy and unvarying gaze. Cosette had betrayed nothing of
tests/les_miserables.txt:28941:they were passing through a crisis. She was deeply conscious that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:28942:was necessary to “be good.” Who has not experienced the sovereign power
tests/les_miserables.txt:28943:of those two words, pronounced with a certain accent in the ear of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28945:guards a secret like a child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28948:beheld Jean Valjean again, she gave vent to such a cry of joy, that any
tests/les_miserables.txt:28949:thoughtful person who had chanced to hear that cry, would have guessed
tests/les_miserables.txt:28952:Fauchelevent belonged to the convent and knew the pass-words. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:28958:The porter, who had received his instructions, opened the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:28959:servant’s door which connected the courtyard with the garden, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:28960:could still be seen from the street twenty years ago, in the wall at
tests/les_miserables.txt:28961:the bottom of the court, which faced the carriage entrance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28964:point they reached the inner, reserved parlor where Fauchelevent, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:28965:the preceding day, had received his orders from the prioress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28967:The prioress, rosary in hand, was waiting for them. A vocal mother,
tests/les_miserables.txt:28970:A discreet candle lighted, one might almost say, made a show of
tests/les_miserables.txt:28973:The prioress passed Jean Valjean in review. There is nothing which
tests/les_miserables.txt:28974:examines like a downcast eye.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28981:“Yes, reverend Mother,” replied Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:28986:Fauchelevent replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28988:“Ultime Fauchelevent.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28993:“Where do you come from?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:28996:Fauchelevent replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:28998:“From Picquigny, near Amiens.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29004:Fauchelevent replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:29012:Fauchelevent replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:29020:Fauchelevent replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:29028:Fauchelevent replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:29036:Fauchelevent replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:29041:The vocal mother said to the prioress in a low voice
tests/les_miserables.txt:29049:vocal mother:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:29054:The two mothers consulted for a few moments in very low tones in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29055:corner of the parlor, then the prioress turned round and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:29057:“Father Fauvent, you will get another knee-cap with a bell. Two will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:29062:and the nuns could not resist the temptation to raise the corner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29065:enormous event. Their silence was broken to the extent of saying to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29066:each other: “He is an assistant gardener.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29069:The vocal mothers added: “He is a brother of Father Fauvent.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29072:Jean Valjean was, in fact, regularly installed; he had his belled
tests/les_miserables.txt:29073:knee-cap; henceforth he was official. His name was Ultime Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29075:The most powerful determining cause of his admission had been the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29079:The prioress, that pronounced prognosticator, immediately took a fancy
tests/les_miserables.txt:29080:to Cosette and gave her a place in the school as a charity pupil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29082:There is nothing that is not strictly logical about this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29084:It is in vain that mirrors are banished from the convent, women are
tests/les_miserables.txt:29085:conscious of their faces; now, girls who are conscious of their beauty
tests/les_miserables.txt:29086:do not easily become nuns; the vocation being voluntary in inverse
tests/les_miserables.txt:29088:from the pretty. Hence a lively taste for plain girls.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29090:The whole of this adventure increased the importance of good, old
tests/les_miserables.txt:29091:Fauchelevent; he won a triple success; in the eyes of Jean Valjean,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29093:said to himself: “He spared me that fine”; with the convent, which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29094:being enabled, thanks to him, to retain the coffin of Mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:29095:Crucifixion under the altar, eluded Cæsar and satisfied God. There was
tests/les_miserables.txt:29096:a coffin containing a body in the Petit-Picpus, and a coffin without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29097:body in the Vaugirard cemetery, public order had no doubt been deeply
tests/les_miserables.txt:29100:As for the convent, its gratitude to Fauchelevent was very great.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29101:Fauchelevent became the best of servitors and the most precious of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29102:gardeners. Upon the occasion of the archbishop’s next visit, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29103:prioress recounted the affair to his Grace, making something of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29104:confession at the same time, and yet boasting of her deed. On leaving
tests/les_miserables.txt:29105:the convent, the archbishop mentioned it with approval, and in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29106:whisper to M. de Latil, Monsieur’s confessor, afterwards Archbishop of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29107:Reims and Cardinal. This admiration for Fauchelevent became widespread,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29110:Nuncio’s establishment in Paris, and bearing, like himself, the name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29111:Della Genga; it contained these lines: “It appears that there is in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29112:convent in Paris an excellent gardener, who is also a holy man, named
tests/les_miserables.txt:29113:Fauvent.” Nothing of this triumph reached Fauchelevent in his hut; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29114:went on grafting, weeding, and covering up his melon beds, without in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29115:the least suspecting his excellences and his sanctity. Neither did he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29116:suspect his glory, any more than a Durham or Surrey bull whose portrait
tests/les_miserables.txt:29117:is published in the _London Illustrated News_, with this inscription:
tests/les_miserables.txt:29118:“Bull which carried off the prize at the Cattle Show.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29127:Cosette continued to hold her tongue in the convent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29130:daughter. Moreover, as she knew nothing, she could say nothing, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29131:then, she would not have said anything in any case. As we have just
tests/les_miserables.txt:29132:observed, nothing trains children to silence like unhappiness. Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:29133:had suffered so much, that she feared everything, even to speak or to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29134:breathe. A single word had so often brought down an avalanche upon her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29135:She had hardly begun to regain her confidence since she had been with
tests/les_miserables.txt:29136:Jean Valjean. She speedily became accustomed to the convent. Only she
tests/les_miserables.txt:29137:regretted Catherine, but she dared not say so. Once, however, she did
tests/les_miserables.txt:29142:Cosette had been obliged, on becoming a scholar in the convent, to don
tests/les_miserables.txt:29143:the garb of the pupils of the house. Jean Valjean succeeded in getting
tests/les_miserables.txt:29144:them to restore to him the garments which she laid aside. This was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29145:same mourning suit which he had made her put on when she had quitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:29147:locked up these garments, plus the stockings and the shoes, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29148:quantity of camphor and all the aromatics in which convents abound, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29149:a little valise which he found means of procuring. He set this valise
tests/les_miserables.txt:29150:on a chair near his bed, and he always carried the key about his
tests/les_miserables.txt:29152:which smells so good?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29155:Father Fauchelevent received other recompense for his good action, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29156:addition to the glory which we just mentioned, and of which he knew
tests/les_miserables.txt:29157:nothing; in the first place it made him happy; next, he had much less
tests/les_miserables.txt:29158:work, since it was shared. Lastly, as he was very fond of snuff, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29159:found the presence of M. Madeleine an advantage, in that he used three
tests/les_miserables.txt:29160:times as much as he had done previously, and that in an infinitely more
tests/les_miserables.txt:29163:The nuns did not adopt the name of Ultime; they called Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:29166:If these holy women had possessed anything of Javert’s glance, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:29167:would eventually have noticed that when there was any errand to be done
tests/les_miserables.txt:29169:Fauchelevent, the old, the infirm, the lame man, who went, and never
tests/les_miserables.txt:29170:the other; but whether it is that eyes constantly fixed on God know not
tests/les_miserables.txt:29171:how to spy, or whether they were, by preference, occupied in keeping
tests/les_miserables.txt:29172:watch on each other, they paid no heed to this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29174:Moreover, it was well for Jean Valjean that he kept close and did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:29175:stir out. Javert watched the quarter for more than a month.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29177:This convent was for Jean Valjean like an island surrounded by gulfs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29178:Henceforth, those four walls constituted his world. He saw enough of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29184:He inhabited the old hut at the end of the garden, in company with
tests/les_miserables.txt:29185:Fauchelevent. This hovel, built of old rubbish, which was still in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29186:existence in 1845, was composed, as the reader already knows, of three
tests/les_miserables.txt:29187:chambers, all of which were utterly bare and had nothing beyond the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29188:walls. The principal one had been given up, by force, for Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:29189:had opposed it in vain, to M. Madeleine, by Father Fauchelevent. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:29190:walls of this chamber had for ornament, in addition to the two nails
tests/les_miserables.txt:29191:whereon to hang the knee-cap and the basket, a Royalist bank-note of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29192:’93, applied to the wall over the chimney-piece, and of which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29193:following is an exact facsimile:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:29197:This specimen of Vendean paper money had been nailed to the wall by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29198:preceding gardener, an old Chouan, who had died in the convent, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29199:whose place Fauchelevent had taken.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29203:himself a gardener once more. It will be remembered that he knew all
tests/les_miserables.txt:29204:sorts of secrets and receipts for agriculture. He turned these to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29205:advantage. Almost all the trees in the orchard were ungrafted, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29206:wild. He budded them and made them produce excellent fruit.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29209:sisters were melancholy and he was kind, the child made comparisons and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29211:the lowly cabin, she filled it with paradise. Jean Valjean blossomed
tests/les_miserables.txt:29212:out and felt his happiness increase with the happiness which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29213:afforded Cosette. The joy which we inspire has this charming property,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29214:that, far from growing meagre, like all reflections, it returns to us
tests/les_miserables.txt:29215:more radiant than ever. At recreation hours, Jean Valjean watched her
tests/les_miserables.txt:29216:running and playing in the distance, and he distinguished her laugh
tests/les_miserables.txt:29221:Cosette’s face had even undergone a change, to a certain extent. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:29223:banishes winter from the human countenance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29225:Recreation over, when Cosette went into the house again, Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:29226:gazed at the windows of her class-room, and at night he rose to look at
tests/les_miserables.txt:29229:God has his own ways, moreover; the convent contributed, like Cosette,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29230:to uphold and complete the Bishop’s work in Jean Valjean. It is certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:29232:exists there. Jean Valjean had been, unconsciously, perhaps, tolerably
tests/les_miserables.txt:29233:near that side and that bridge, when Providence cast his lot in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29234:convent of the Petit-Picpus; so long as he had compared himself only to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29236:humble; but for some time past he had been comparing himself to men in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29240:The convent stopped him on that downward path.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29242:This was the second place of captivity which he had seen. In his youth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29244:recently again, he had beheld another,—a frightful place, a terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:29245:place, whose severities had always appeared to him the iniquity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29246:justice, and the crime of the law. Now, after the galleys, he saw the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29247:cloister; and when he meditated how he had formed a part of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29248:galleys, and that he now, so to speak, was a spectator of the cloister,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29249:he confronted the two in his own mind with anxiety.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29251:Sometimes he crossed his arms and leaned on his hoe, and slowly
tests/les_miserables.txt:29252:descended the endless spirals of reverie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29254:He recalled his former companions: how wretched they were; they rose at
tests/les_miserables.txt:29256:lay on camp beds, where nothing was tolerated but mattresses two inches
tests/les_miserables.txt:29257:thick, in rooms which were heated only in the very harshest months of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29258:the year; they were clothed in frightful red blouses; they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:29260:woollen carter’s blouse on their backs when it was very cold; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:29261:drank no wine, and ate no meat, except when they went on “fatigue
tests/les_miserables.txt:29262:duty.” They lived nameless, designated only by numbers, and converted,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29263:after a manner, into ciphers themselves, with downcast eyes, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:29264:lowered voices, with shorn heads, beneath the cudgel and in disgrace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29268:These beings also lived with shorn heads, with downcast eyes, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:29269:lowered voices, not in disgrace, but amid the scoffs of the world, not
tests/les_miserables.txt:29270:with their backs bruised with the cudgel, but with their shoulders
tests/les_miserables.txt:29271:lacerated with their discipline. Their names, also, had vanished from
tests/les_miserables.txt:29272:among men; they no longer existed except under austere appellations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29275:in a black shroud, of woollen, which was heavy in summer and thin in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29276:winter, without the power to add or subtract anything from it; without
tests/les_miserables.txt:29277:having even, according to the season, the resource of the linen garment
tests/les_miserables.txt:29278:or the woollen cloak; and for six months in the year they wore serge
tests/les_miserables.txt:29279:chemises which gave them fever. They dwelt, not in rooms warmed only
tests/les_miserables.txt:29280:during rigorous cold, but in cells where no fire was ever lighted; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:29281:slept, not on mattresses two inches thick, but on straw. And finally,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29285:warm, to rouse themselves, to rise and to go and pray in an ice-cold
tests/les_miserables.txt:29286:and gloomy chapel, with their knees on the stones.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29288:On certain days each of these beings in turn had to remain for twelve
tests/les_miserables.txt:29289:successive hours in a kneeling posture, or prostrate, with face upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:29290:the pavement, and arms outstretched in the form of a cross.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29295:assassinated. They were bandits, counterfeiters, poisoners,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29296:incendiaries, murderers, parricides. What had these women done? They
tests/les_miserables.txt:29299:On the one hand, highway robbery, fraud, deceit, violence, sensuality,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29300:homicide, all sorts of sacrilege, every variety of crime; on the other,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29301:one thing only, innocence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29303:Perfect innocence, almost caught up into heaven in a mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:29304:assumption, attached to the earth by virtue, already possessing
tests/les_miserables.txt:29307:On the one hand, confidences over crimes, which are exchanged in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29308:whispers; on the other, the confession of faults made aloud. And what
tests/les_miserables.txt:29309:crimes! And what faults!
tests/les_miserables.txt:29313:cannon, and literally devouring its plague-stricken victims; on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29314:other, the chaste flame of all souls on the same hearth. There,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29316:and of gleams full of radiance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29318:Two strongholds of slavery; but in the first, deliverance possible, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29319:legal limit always in sight, and then, escape. In the second,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29321:faint light of liberty which men call death.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29323:In the first, men are bound only with chains; in the other, chained by
tests/les_miserables.txt:29326:What flowed from the first? An immense curse, the gnashing of teeth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29327:hatred, desperate viciousness, a cry of rage against human society, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29328:sarcasm against heaven.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29330:What results flowed from the second? Blessings and love.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29332:And in these two places, so similar yet so unlike, these two species of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29338:understand that of these last, that of creatures without reproach and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29342:A voice within his conscience replied: “The most divine of human
tests/les_miserables.txt:29347:place ourselves at Jean Valjean’s point of view, and we translate his
tests/les_miserables.txt:29351:possible pitch of virtue; the innocence which pardons men their faults,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29352:and which expiates in their stead; servitude submitted to, torture
tests/les_miserables.txt:29353:accepted, punishment claimed by souls which have not sinned, for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29354:sake of sparing it to souls which have fallen; the love of humanity
tests/les_miserables.txt:29355:swallowed up in the love of God, but even there preserving its distinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:29356:and mediatorial character; sweet and feeble beings possessing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29358:recompensed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29363:song of those innocent creatures weighed down with severities, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29364:blood ran cold in his veins at the thought that those who were justly
tests/les_miserables.txt:29365:chastised raised their voices heavenward only in blasphemy, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:29366:he, wretch that he was, had shaken his fist at God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29368:There was one striking thing which caused him to meditate deeply, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:29369:a warning whisper from Providence itself: the scaling of that wall, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29370:passing of those barriers, the adventure accepted even at the risk of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29371:death, the painful and difficult ascent, all those efforts even, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:29372:he had made to escape from that other place of expiation, he had made
tests/les_miserables.txt:29373:in order to gain entrance into this one. Was this a symbol of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:29374:destiny? This house was a prison likewise and bore a melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:29375:resemblance to that other one whence he had fled, and yet he had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:29376:conceived an idea of anything similar.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29380:These lofty walls which he had seen around tigers, he now beheld once
tests/les_miserables.txt:29383:This was a place of expiation, and not of punishment; and yet, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:29386:These virgins were even more heavily burdened than the convicts. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:29387:cold, harsh wind, that wind which had chilled his youth, traversed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29388:barred and padlocked grating of the vultures; a still harsher and more
tests/les_miserables.txt:29389:biting breeze blew in the cage of these doves.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29396:In these meditations, his pride vanished. He scrutinized his own heart
tests/les_miserables.txt:29399:back towards the Bishop’s holy injunctions; Cosette through love, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29400:convent through humility.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29403:deserted, he could be seen on his knees in the middle of the walk which
tests/les_miserables.txt:29404:skirted the chapel, in front of the window through which he had gazed
tests/les_miserables.txt:29409:It seemed as though he dared not kneel directly before God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29411:Everything that surrounded him, that peaceful garden, those fragrant
tests/les_miserables.txt:29412:flowers, those children who uttered joyous cries, those grave and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29413:simple women, that silent cloister, slowly permeated him, and little by
tests/les_miserables.txt:29414:little, his soul became compounded of silence like the cloister, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29415:perfume like the flowers, of simplicity like the women, of joy like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29416:children. And then he reflected that these had been two houses of God
tests/les_miserables.txt:29417:which had received him in succession at two critical moments in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:29418:life: the first, when all doors were closed and when human society
tests/les_miserables.txt:29419:rejected him; the second, at a moment when human society had again set
tests/les_miserables.txt:29422:crime, and had it not been for the second, into torment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29439:[Illustration: Frontispiece Volume Three]
tests/les_miserables.txt:29454:Paris has a child, and the forest has a bird; the bird is called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29455:sparrow; the child is called the gamin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29457:Couple these two ideas which contain, the one all the furnace, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29458:other all the dawn; strike these two sparks together, Paris, childhood;
tests/les_miserables.txt:29459:there leaps out from them a little being. _Homuncio_, Plautus would
tests/les_miserables.txt:29467:air, wears an old pair of trousers of his father’s, which descend below
tests/les_miserables.txt:29468:his heels, an old hat of some other father, which descends below his
tests/les_miserables.txt:29470:rummages about, wastes time, blackens pipes, swears like a convict,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29471:haunts the wine-shop, knows thieves, calls gay women _thou_, talks
tests/les_miserables.txt:29472:slang, sings obscene songs, and has no evil in his heart. This is
tests/les_miserables.txt:29473:because he has in his heart a pearl, innocence; and pearls are not to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29474:be dissolved in mud. So long as man is in his childhood, God wills that
tests/les_miserables.txt:29475:he shall be innocent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29477:If one were to ask that enormous city: “What is this?” she would reply:
tests/les_miserables.txt:29489:Let us not exaggerate, this cherub of the gutter sometimes has a shirt,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29490:but, in that case, he owns but one; he sometimes has shoes, but then
tests/les_miserables.txt:29492:finds his mother there; but he prefers the street, because there he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29493:finds liberty. He has his own games, his own bits of mischief, whose
tests/les_miserables.txt:29494:foundation consists of hatred for the bourgeois; his peculiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:29496:occupations, calling hackney-coaches, letting down carriage-steps,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29498:heavy rains, which he calls _making the bridge of arts_, crying
tests/les_miserables.txt:29499:discourses pronounced by the authorities in favor of the French people,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29500:cleaning out the cracks in the pavement; he has his own coinage, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:29501:is composed of all the little morsels of worked copper which are found
tests/les_miserables.txt:29502:on the public streets. This curious money, which receives the name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29503:_loques_—rags—has an invariable and well-regulated currency in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:29504:little Bohemia of children.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29506:Lastly, he has his own fauna, which he observes attentively in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29507:corners; the lady-bird, the death’s-head plant-louse, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29508:daddy-long-legs, “the devil,” a black insect, which menaces by twisting
tests/les_miserables.txt:29509:about its tail armed with two horns. He has his fabulous monster, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:29510:has scales under its belly, but is not a lizard, which has pustules on
tests/les_miserables.txt:29511:its back, but is not a toad, which inhabits the nooks of old lime-kilns
tests/les_miserables.txt:29512:and wells that have run dry, which is black, hairy, sticky, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:29513:crawls sometimes slowly, sometimes rapidly, which has no cry, but which
tests/les_miserables.txt:29514:has a look, and is so terrible that no one has ever beheld it; he calls
tests/les_miserables.txt:29515:this monster “the deaf thing.” The search for these “deaf things” among
tests/les_miserables.txt:29516:the stones is a joy of formidable nature. Another pleasure consists in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29517:suddenly prying up a paving-stone, and taking a look at the wood-lice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29518:Each region of Paris is celebrated for the interesting treasures which
tests/les_miserables.txt:29521:the ditches of the Champs-de-Mars.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29523:As far as sayings are concerned, this child has as many of them as
tests/les_miserables.txt:29524:Talleyrand. He is no less cynical, but he is more honest. He is endowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:29525:with a certain indescribable, unexpected joviality; he upsets the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29526:composure of the shopkeeper with his wild laughter. He ranges boldly
tests/les_miserables.txt:29527:from high comedy to farce.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29529:A funeral passes by. Among those who accompany the dead there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29530:doctor. “Hey there!” shouts some street Arab, “how long has it been
tests/les_miserables.txt:29531:customary for doctors to carry home their own work?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29534:Another is in a crowd. A grave man, adorned with spectacles and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29536:seized my wife’s waist!”—“I, sir? Search me!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29545:In the evening, thanks to a few sous, which he always finds means to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29546:procure, the _homuncio_ enters a theatre. On crossing that magic
tests/les_miserables.txt:29547:threshold, he becomes transfigured; he was the street Arab, he becomes
tests/les_miserables.txt:29551:endowed with wings and soaring. It suffices for him to be there, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:29552:his radiance of happiness, with his power of enthusiasm and joy, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:29553:his hand-clapping, which resembles a clapping of wings, to confer on
tests/les_miserables.txt:29557:Bestow on an individual the useless and deprive him of the necessary,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29560:The gamin is not devoid of literary intuition. His tendency, and we say
tests/les_miserables.txt:29561:it with the proper amount of regret, would not constitute classic
tests/les_miserables.txt:29562:taste. He is not very academic by nature. Thus, to give an example, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29563:popularity of Mademoiselle Mars among that little audience of stormy
tests/les_miserables.txt:29564:children was seasoned with a touch of irony. The gamin called her
tests/les_miserables.txt:29565:_Mademoiselle Muche_—“hide yourself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29568:This being bawls and scoffs and ridicules and fights, has rags like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29570:cesspool, extracts mirth from foulness, whips up the squares with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:29572:Alleluia with Matanturlurette, chants every rhythm from the De
tests/les_miserables.txt:29573:Profundis to the Jack-pudding, finds without seeking, knows what he is
tests/les_miserables.txt:29575:is lyrical to filth, would crouch down on Olympus, wallows in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29576:dunghill and emerges from it covered with stars. The gamin of Paris is
tests/les_miserables.txt:29579:He is not content with his trousers unless they have a watch-pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29584:poetry out of stilted things, he introduces caricature into epic
tests/les_miserables.txt:29585:extravaganzas. It is not that he is prosaic; far from that; but he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29586:replaces the solemn vision by the farcical phantasmagoria. If Adamastor
tests/les_miserables.txt:29598:of which no other city is capable; the passive acceptance, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:29599:contents itself with gazing, and the inexhaustible initiative;
tests/les_miserables.txt:29601:The whole of the monarchy is contained in the lounger; the whole of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29602:anarchy in the gamin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29604:This pale child of the Parisian faubourgs lives and develops, makes
tests/les_miserables.txt:29605:connections, “grows supple” in suffering, in the presence of social
tests/les_miserables.txt:29609:name is Prejudice, Abuse, Ignorance, Oppression, Iniquity, Despotism,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29610:Injustice, Fanaticism, Tyranny, beware of the gaping gamin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29614:Of what clay is he made? Of the first mud that comes to hand. A handful
tests/les_miserables.txt:29615:of dirt, a breath, and behold Adam. It suffices for a God to pass by. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:29617:being. By the word “fortune” we mean chance, to some extent. That pigmy
tests/les_miserables.txt:29618:kneaded out of common earth, ignorant, unlettered, giddy, vulgar, low.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29619:Will that become an Ionian or a Bœotian? Wait, _currit rota_, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29620:Spirit of Paris, that demon which creates the children of chance and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29621:the men of destiny, reversing the process of the Latin potter, makes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29630:The gamin loves the city, he also loves solitude, since he has
tests/les_miserables.txt:29631:something of the sage in him. _Urbis amator_, like Fuscus; _ruris
tests/les_miserables.txt:29632:amator_, like Flaccus.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29635:employment of time in the eyes of the philosopher; particularly in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:29636:rather illegitimate species of campaign, which is tolerably ugly but
tests/les_miserables.txt:29637:odd and composed of two natures, which surrounds certain great cities,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29642:beginning of the human uproar; hence an extraordinary interest.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29644:Hence, in these not very attractive places, indelibly stamped by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29645:passing stroller with the epithet: _melancholy_, the apparently
tests/les_miserables.txt:29646:objectless promenades of the dreamer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29649:Paris, and it is for him a source of profound souvenirs. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:29650:close-shaven turf, those pebbly paths, that chalk, those pools, those
tests/les_miserables.txt:29653:of the savage and the citizen, those vast desert nooks where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29654:garrison drums practise noisily, and produce a sort of lisping of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29655:battle, those hermits by day and cut-throats by night, that clumsy mill
tests/les_miserables.txt:29656:which turns in the wind, the hoisting-wheels of the quarries, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29657:tea-gardens at the corners of the cemeteries; the mysterious charm of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29658:great, sombre walls squarely intersecting immense, vague stretches of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29660:attracted him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29662:There is hardly any one on earth who is not acquainted with those
tests/les_miserables.txt:29663:singular spots, the Glacière, the Cunette, the hideous wall of Grenelle
tests/les_miserables.txt:29664:all speckled with balls, Mont-Parnasse, the Fosse-aux-Loups, Aubiers on
tests/les_miserables.txt:29666:de Châtillon, where there is an old, exhausted quarry which no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:29667:serves any purpose except to raise mushrooms, and which is closed, on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29668:level with the ground, by a trap-door of rotten planks. The campagna of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29670:but fields, houses, or trees in what a stretch of country offers us, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:29671:to remain on the surface; all aspects of things are thoughts of God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29672:The spot where a plain effects its junction with a city is always
tests/les_miserables.txt:29673:stamped with a certain piercing melancholy. Nature and humanity both
tests/les_miserables.txt:29674:appeal to you at the same time there. Local originalities there make
tests/les_miserables.txt:29675:their appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29678:contiguous to our faubourgs, which may be designated as the limbos of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29680:unexpected moment, behind a meagre hedge, or in the corner of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29681:lugubrious wall, children grouped tumultuously, fetid, muddy, dusty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29682:ragged, dishevelled, playing hide-and-seek, and crowned with
tests/les_miserables.txt:29683:corn-flowers. All of them are little ones who have made their escape
tests/les_miserables.txt:29684:from poor families. The outer boulevard is their breathing space; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29686:they innocently sing their repertory of dirty songs. There they are, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:29690:free and happy; and, no sooner do they catch sight of you than they
tests/les_miserables.txt:29691:recollect that they have an industry, and that they must earn their
tests/les_miserables.txt:29692:living, and they offer to sell you an old woollen stocking filled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:29693:cockchafers, or a bunch of lilacs. These encounters with strange
tests/les_miserables.txt:29694:children are one of the charming and at the same time poignant graces
tests/les_miserables.txt:29699:sunburnt hands, covered with freckles, crowned with poppies and ears of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29700:rye, gay, haggard, barefooted. They can be seen devouring cherries
tests/les_miserables.txt:29701:among the wheat. In the evening they can be heard laughing. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:29702:groups, warmly illuminated by the full glow of midday, or indistinctly
tests/les_miserables.txt:29703:seen in the twilight, occupy the thoughtful man for a very long time,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29706:Paris, centre, banlieue, circumference; this constitutes all the earth
tests/les_miserables.txt:29707:to those children. They never venture beyond this. They can no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:29708:escape from the Parisian atmosphere than fish can escape from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29710:Gentilly, Arcueil, Belleville, Aubervilliers, Ménilmontant,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29711:Choisy-le-Roi, Billancourt, Meudon, Issy, Vanvre, Sèvres, Puteaux,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29713:Bougival, Nanterre, Enghien, Noisy-le-Sec, Nogent, Gournay, Drancy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29722:At the epoch, nearly contemporary by the way, when the action of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:29723:book takes place, there was not, as there is to-day, a policeman at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29724:corner of every street (a benefit which there is no time to discuss
tests/les_miserables.txt:29725:here); stray children abounded in Paris. The statistics give an average
tests/les_miserables.txt:29726:of two hundred and sixty homeless children picked up annually at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:29727:period, by the police patrols, in unenclosed lands, in houses in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29728:process of construction, and under the arches of the bridges. One of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29729:these nests, which has become famous, produced “the swallows of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29730:bridge of Arcola.” This is, moreover, the most disastrous of social
tests/les_miserables.txt:29731:symptoms. All crimes of the man begin in the vagabondage of the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29733:Let us make an exception in favor of Paris, nevertheless. In a relative
tests/les_miserables.txt:29734:measure, and in spite of the souvenir which we have just recalled, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29735:exception is just. While in any other great city the vagabond child is
tests/les_miserables.txt:29736:a lost man, while nearly everywhere the child left to itself is, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29737:some sort, sacrificed and abandoned to a kind of fatal immersion in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29738:public vices which devour in him honesty and conscience, the street boy
tests/les_miserables.txt:29739:of Paris, we insist on this point, however defaced and injured on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29740:surface, is almost intact on the interior. It is a magnificent thing to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29741:put on record, and one which shines forth in the splendid probity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29742:our popular revolutions, that a certain incorruptibility results from
tests/les_miserables.txt:29743:the idea which exists in the air of Paris, as salt exists in the water
tests/les_miserables.txt:29744:of the ocean. To breathe Paris preserves the soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29746:What we have just said takes away nothing of the anguish of heart which
tests/les_miserables.txt:29747:one experiences every time that one meets one of these children around
tests/les_miserables.txt:29748:whom one fancies that he beholds floating the threads of a broken
tests/les_miserables.txt:29749:family. In the civilization of the present day, incomplete as it still
tests/les_miserables.txt:29750:is, it is not a very abnormal thing to behold these fractured families
tests/les_miserables.txt:29751:pouring themselves out into the darkness, not knowing clearly what has
tests/les_miserables.txt:29752:become of their children, and allowing their own entrails to fall on
tests/les_miserables.txt:29753:the public highway. Hence these obscure destinies. This is called, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:29754:this sad thing has given rise to an expression, “to be cast on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29758:Let it be said by the way, that this abandonment of children was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:29759:discouraged by the ancient monarchy. A little of Egypt and Bohemia in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29760:the lower regions suited the upper spheres, and compassed the aims of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29761:the powerful. The hatred of instruction for the children of the people
tests/les_miserables.txt:29762:was a dogma. What is the use of “half-lights”? Such was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29763:countersign. Now, the erring child is the corollary of the ignorant
tests/les_miserables.txt:29764:child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29766:Besides this, the monarchy sometimes was in need of children, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29767:that case it skimmed the streets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29769:Under Louis XIV., not to go any further back, the king rightly desired
tests/les_miserables.txt:29770:to create a fleet. The idea was a good one. But let us consider the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29771:means. There can be no fleet, if, beside the sailing ship, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:29772:plaything of the winds, and for the purpose of towing it, in case of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29773:necessity, there is not the vessel which goes where it pleases, either
tests/les_miserables.txt:29775:steamers are to-day. Therefore, galleys were necessary; but the galley
tests/les_miserables.txt:29776:is moved only by the galley-slave; hence, galley-slaves were required.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29777:Colbert had the commissioners of provinces and the parliaments make as
tests/les_miserables.txt:29778:many convicts as possible. The magistracy showed a great deal of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29779:complaisance in the matter. A man kept his hat on in the presence of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29780:procession—it was a Huguenot attitude; he was sent to the galleys. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:29781:child was encountered in the streets; provided that he was fifteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:29783:galleys. Grand reign; grand century.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29785:Under Louis XV. children disappeared in Paris; the police carried them
tests/les_miserables.txt:29787:terror monstrous conjectures as to the king’s baths of purple. Barbier
tests/les_miserables.txt:29789:exempts of the guard, when they ran short of children, took those who
tests/les_miserables.txt:29790:had fathers. The fathers, in despair, attacked the exempts. In that
tests/les_miserables.txt:29791:case, the parliament intervened and had some one hung. Who? The
tests/les_miserables.txt:29801:The body of street Arabs in Paris almost constitutes a caste. One might
tests/les_miserables.txt:29802:almost say: Not every one who wishes to belong to it can do so.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29804:This word _gamin_ was printed for the first time, and reached popular
tests/les_miserables.txt:29805:speech through the literary tongue, in 1834. It is in a little work
tests/les_miserables.txt:29806:entitled _Claude Gueux_ that this word made its appearance. The horror
tests/les_miserables.txt:29807:was lively. The word passed into circulation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29809:The elements which constitute the consideration of the gamins for each
tests/les_miserables.txt:29810:other are very various. We have known and associated with one who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:29811:greatly respected and vastly admired because he had seen a man fall
tests/les_miserables.txt:29812:from the top of the tower of Notre-Dame; another, because he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:29813:succeeded in making his way into the rear courtyard where the statues
tests/les_miserables.txt:29815:“prigged” some lead from them; a third, because he had seen a diligence
tests/les_miserables.txt:29816:tip over; still another, because he “knew” a soldier who came near
tests/les_miserables.txt:29817:putting out the eye of a citizen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29819:This explains that famous exclamation of a Parisian gamin, a profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:29820:epiphonema, which the vulgar herd laughs at without comprehending,—
tests/les_miserables.txt:29821:_Dieu de Dieu! What ill-luck I do have! to think that I have never yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:29822:seen anybody tumble from a fifth-story window! _ (_I have_ pronounced
tests/les_miserables.txt:29823:_I’ave_ and _fifth_ pronounced _fift’_.)
tests/les_miserables.txt:29826:wife has died of her malady; why did you not send for the doctor?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29829:free-thinking anarchy of the brat of the faubourgs is, assuredly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29830:contained in this other saying. A man condemned to death is listening
tests/les_miserables.txt:29831:to his confessor in the tumbrel. The child of Paris exclaims: “He is
tests/les_miserables.txt:29832:talking to his black cap! Oh, the sneak!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29835:A certain audacity on matters of religion sets off the gamin. To be
tests/les_miserables.txt:29838:To be present at executions constitutes a duty. He shows himself at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29839:guillotine, and he laughs. He calls it by all sorts of pet names: The
tests/les_miserables.txt:29841:Last Mouthful, etc., etc. In order not to lose anything of the affair,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29842:he scales the walls, he hoists himself to balconies, he ascends trees,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29843:he suspends himself to gratings, he clings fast to chimneys. The gamin
tests/les_miserables.txt:29845:more fear than a mast. There is no festival which comes up to an
tests/les_miserables.txt:29846:execution on the Place de Grève. Samson and the Abbé Montès are the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29847:truly popular names. They hoot at the victim in order to encourage him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29848:They sometimes admire him. Lacenaire, when a gamin, on seeing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29849:hideous Dautin die bravely, uttered these words which contain a future:
tests/les_miserables.txt:29851:known, but Papavoine is. “Politicians” are confused with assassins in
tests/les_miserables.txt:29853:It is known that Tolleron had a fireman’s cap, Avril an otter cap,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29855:Castaing was all ruddy and very handsome, that Bories had a romantic
tests/les_miserables.txt:29856:small beard, that Jean Martin kept on his suspenders, that Lecouffé and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29857:his mother quarrelled. “Don’t reproach each other for your basket,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29858:shouted a gamin to them. Another, in order to get a look at Debacker as
tests/les_miserables.txt:29859:he passed, and being too small in the crowd, caught sight of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29860:lantern on the quay and climbed it. A gendarme stationed opposite
tests/les_miserables.txt:29861:frowned. “Let me climb up, m’sieu le gendarme,” said the gamin. And, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29863:don’t care if you do,” retorted the gendarme.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29865:In the brotherhood of gamins, a memorable accident counts for a great
tests/les_miserables.txt:29866:deal. One reaches the height of consideration if one chances to cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:29870:The fist is no mediocre element of respect. One of the things that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29871:gamin is fondest of saying is: “I am fine and strong, come now!” To be
tests/les_miserables.txt:29883:from the tops of coal wagons, and the washerwomen’s boats, he hurls
tests/les_miserables.txt:29884:himself headlong into the Seine, and into all possible infractions of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29885:the laws of modesty and of the police. Nevertheless the police keep an
tests/les_miserables.txt:29886:eye on him, and the result is a highly dramatic situation which once
tests/les_miserables.txt:29887:gave rise to a fraternal and memorable cry; that cry which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:29888:celebrated about 1830, is a strategic warning from gamin to gamin; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:29889:scans like a verse from Homer, with a notation as inexpressible as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29890:eleusiac chant of the Panathenæa, and in it one encounters again the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29891:ancient Evohe. Here it is: “Ohé, Titi, ohééé! Here comes the bobby,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29892:here comes the p’lice, pick up your duds and be off, through the sewer
tests/les_miserables.txt:29896:Sometimes this gnat—that is what he calls himself—knows how to read;
tests/les_miserables.txt:29898:not hesitate to acquire, by no one knows what mysterious mutual
tests/les_miserables.txt:29899:instruction, all the talents which can be of use to the public; from
tests/les_miserables.txt:29900:1815 to 1830, he imitated the cry of the turkey; from 1830 to 1848, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29901:scrawled pears on the walls. One summer evening, when Louis Philippe
tests/les_miserables.txt:29903:knee, perspiring and climbing up to draw a gigantic pear in charcoal on
tests/les_miserables.txt:29905:good-nature which came to him from Henry IV., helped the gamin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29906:finished the pear, and gave the child a louis, saying: “The pear is on
tests/les_miserables.txt:29907:that also.”19 The gamin loves uproar. A certain state of violence
tests/les_miserables.txt:29908:pleases him. He execrates “the curés.” One day, in the Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:29909:l’Université, one of these scamps was putting his thumb to his nose at
tests/les_miserables.txt:29910:the carriage gate of No. 69. “Why are you doing that at the gate?” a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29911:passer-by asked. The boy replied: “There is a curé there.” It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:29912:there, in fact, that the Papal Nuncio lived.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29915:the occasion to become a chorister presents itself, it is quite
tests/les_miserables.txt:29916:possible that he will accept, and in that case he serves the mass
tests/les_miserables.txt:29917:civilly. There are two things to which he plays Tantalus, and which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29921:The gamin in his perfect state possesses all the policemen of Paris,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29922:and can always put the name to the face of any one which he chances to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29923:meet. He can tell them off on the tips of his fingers. He studies their
tests/les_miserables.txt:29924:habits, and he has special notes on each one of them. He reads the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29925:souls of the police like an open book. He will tell you fluently and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29926:without flinching: “Such an one is a _traitor_; such another is very
tests/les_miserables.txt:29927:_malicious_; such another is _great_; such another is _ridiculous_.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:29928:(All these words: traitor, malicious, great, ridiculous, have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29929:particular meaning in his mouth.) That one imagines that he owns the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29930:Pont-Neuf, and he prevents _people_ from walking on the cornice outside
tests/les_miserables.txt:29931:the parapet; that other has a mania for pulling _person’s_ ears; etc.,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29932:etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29941:fish-market; Beaumarchais had something of it. Gaminerie is a shade of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29942:the Gallic spirit. Mingled with good sense, it sometimes adds force to
tests/les_miserables.txt:29943:the latter, as alcohol does to wine. Sometimes it is a defect. Homer
tests/les_miserables.txt:29946:who treated miracles brutally, rose from the pavements of Paris; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29947:had, when a small lad, inundated the porticos of Saint-Jean de
tests/les_miserables.txt:29952:The gamin of Paris is respectful, ironical, and insolent. He has
tests/les_miserables.txt:29953:villainous teeth, because he is badly fed and his stomach suffers, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:29954:handsome eyes because he has wit. If Jehovah himself were present, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:29958:the presence of grape-shot; he was a scapegrace, he is a hero; like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29960:was a gamin of Paris; he Shouts: “Forward!” as the horse of Scripture
tests/les_miserables.txt:29964:This child of the puddle is also the child of the ideal. Measure that
tests/les_miserables.txt:29965:spread of wings which reaches from Molière to Barra.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29968:himself, because he is unhappy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29976:To sum it all up once more, the Paris gamin of to-day, like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29977:_græculus_ of Rome in days gone by, is the infant populace with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:29980:The gamin is a grace to the nation, and at the same time a disease; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29981:disease which must be cured, how? By light.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29987:All generous social irradiations spring from science, letters, arts,
tests/les_miserables.txt:29988:education. Make men, make men. Give them light that they may warm you.
tests/les_miserables.txt:29989:Sooner or later the splendid question of universal education will
tests/les_miserables.txt:29991:and then, those who govern under the superintendence of the French idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:29992:will have to make this choice; the children of France or the gamins of
tests/les_miserables.txt:29997:For Paris is a total. Paris is the ceiling of the human race. The whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:29998:of this prodigious city is a foreshortening of dead manners and living
tests/les_miserables.txt:30000:with heaven and constellations in the intervals. Paris has a capital,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30003:Via Sacra, the Boulevard des Italiens, a temple of the winds, opinion;
tests/les_miserables.txt:30004:and it replaces the Gemoniæ by ridicule. Its _majo_ is called “faraud,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30006:market-porter, its lazzarone is the pègre, its cockney is the native of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30008:of Dumarsais can retort on the herb-seller of Euripides, the discobols
tests/les_miserables.txt:30009:Vejanus lives again in the Forioso, the tight-rope dancer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30010:Therapontigonus Miles could walk arm in arm with Vadeboncœur the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30011:grenadier, Damasippus the second-hand dealer would be happy among
tests/les_miserables.txt:30012:bric-à-brac merchants, Vincennes could grasp Socrates in its fist as
tests/les_miserables.txt:30013:just as Agora could imprison Diderot, Grimod de la Reynière discovered
tests/les_miserables.txt:30015:trapeze which figures in Plautus reappear under the vault of the Arc of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30016:l’Etoile, the sword-eater of Pœcilus encountered by Apuleius is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30017:sword-swallower on the Pont-Neuf, the nephew of Rameau and Curculio the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30018:parasite make a pair, Ergasilus could get himself presented to
tests/les_miserables.txt:30019:Cambacères by d’Aigrefeuille; the four dandies of Rome: Alcesimarchus,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30020:Phœdromus, Diabolus, and Argyrippus, descend from Courtille in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30021:Labatut’s posting-chaise; Aulus Gellius would halt no longer in front
tests/les_miserables.txt:30022:of Congrio than would Charles Nodier in front of Punchinello; Marto is
tests/les_miserables.txt:30023:not a tigress, but Pardalisca was not a dragon; Pantolabus the wag
tests/les_miserables.txt:30025:tenor in the Champs-Élysées, and round him, Thracius the beggar, clad
tests/les_miserables.txt:30026:like Bobèche, takes up a collection; the bore who stops you by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30027:button of your coat in the Tuileries makes you repeat after a lapse of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30030:the red border of Desaugiers forms a balance to the great cutting of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30031:Balatro, Père-Lachaise exhales beneath nocturnal rains the same gleams
tests/les_miserables.txt:30033:certainly the equivalent of the slave’s hived coffin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30035:Seek something that Paris has not. The vat of Trophonius contains
tests/les_miserables.txt:30037:Cagliostro; the Brahmin Vâsaphantâ become incarnate in the Comte de
tests/les_miserables.txt:30038:Saint-Germain; the cemetery of Saint-Médard works quite as good
tests/les_miserables.txt:30039:miracles as the Mosque of Oumoumié at Damascus.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30043:makes tables turn as Dodona did tripods. It places the grisette on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30044:throne, as Rome placed the courtesan there; and, taking it altogether,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30046:Messalina. Paris combines in an unprecedented type, which has existed
tests/les_miserables.txt:30047:and which we have elbowed, Grecian nudity, the Hebraic ulcer, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30048:Gascon pun. It mingles Diogenes, Job, and Jack-pudding, dresses up a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30049:spectre in old numbers of the _Constitutional_, and makes Chodruc
tests/les_miserables.txt:30050:Duclos.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30052:Although Plutarch says: _the tyrant never grows old_, Rome, under Sylla
tests/les_miserables.txt:30054:The Tiber was a Lethe, if the rather doctrinary eulogium made of it by
tests/les_miserables.txt:30055:Varus Vibiscus is to be credited: _Contra Gracchos Tiberim habemus,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30056:Bibere Tiberim, id est seditionem oblivisci_. Paris drinks a million
tests/les_miserables.txt:30057:litres of water a day, but that does not prevent it from occasionally
tests/les_miserables.txt:30058:beating the general alarm and ringing the tocsin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30060:With that exception, Paris is amiable. It accepts everything royally;
tests/les_miserables.txt:30061:it is not too particular about its Venus; its Callipyge is Hottentot;
tests/les_miserables.txt:30062:provided that it is made to laugh, it condones; ugliness cheers it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30063:deformity provokes it to laughter, vice diverts it; be eccentric and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30064:you may be an eccentric; even hypocrisy, that supreme cynicism, does
tests/les_miserables.txt:30066:Basile, and is no more scandalized by the prayer of Tartuffe than
tests/les_miserables.txt:30067:Horace was repelled by the “hiccup” of Priapus. No trait of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30068:universal face is lacking in the profile of Paris. The bal Mabile is
tests/les_miserables.txt:30069:not the polymnia dance of the Janiculum, but the dealer in ladies’
tests/les_miserables.txt:30070:wearing apparel there devours the lorette with her eyes, exactly as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30071:procuress Staphyla lay in wait for the virgin Planesium. The Barrière
tests/les_miserables.txt:30072:du Combat is not the Coliseum, but people are as ferocious there as
tests/les_miserables.txt:30073:though Cæsar were looking on. The Syrian hostess has more grace than
tests/les_miserables.txt:30075:d’Angers, Balzac and Charlet have sat at the tables of Parisian
tests/les_miserables.txt:30077:prosper there. Adonaï passes on his chariot with its twelve wheels of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30082:Pantin. All civilizations are there in an abridged form, all barbarisms
tests/les_miserables.txt:30085:A little of the Place de Grève is a good thing. What would all that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30095:There is no limit to Paris. No city has had that domination which
tests/les_miserables.txt:30097:exclaimed Alexander. Paris makes more than the law, it makes the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30100:then the universe is stupid in company with it; then Paris awakes, rubs
tests/les_miserables.txt:30101:its eyes, says: “How stupid I am!” and bursts out laughing in the face
tests/les_miserables.txt:30102:of the human race. What a marvel is such a city! it is a strange thing
tests/les_miserables.txt:30103:that this grandioseness and this burlesque should be amicable
tests/les_miserables.txt:30105:all this parody, and that the same mouth can to-day blow into the trump
tests/les_miserables.txt:30107:sovereign joviality. Its gayety is of the thunder and its farce holds a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30108:sceptre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30110:Its tempest sometimes proceeds from a grimace. Its explosions, its
tests/les_miserables.txt:30111:days, its masterpieces, its prodigies, its epics, go forth to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30112:bounds of the universe, and so also do its cock-and-bull stories. Its
tests/les_miserables.txt:30113:laugh is the mouth of a volcano which spatters the whole earth. Its
tests/les_miserables.txt:30114:jests are sparks. It imposes its caricatures as well as its ideal on
tests/les_miserables.txt:30115:people; the highest monuments of human civilization accept its ironies
tests/les_miserables.txt:30116:and lend their eternity to its mischievous pranks. It is superb; it has
tests/les_miserables.txt:30117:a prodigious 14th of July, which delivers the globe; it forces all
tests/les_miserables.txt:30120:logic the muscle of unanimous will; it multiplies itself under all
tests/les_miserables.txt:30122:Kosciusko, Bolivar, Bozzaris, Riego, Bem, Manin, Lopez, John Brown,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30125:Palermo in 1860, it whispers the mighty countersign: Liberty, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30126:ear of the American abolitionists grouped about the boat at Harper’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:30127:Ferry, and in the ear of the patriots of Ancona assembled in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30128:shadow, to the Archi before the Gozzi inn on the seashore; it creates
tests/les_miserables.txt:30129:Canaris; it creates Quiroga; it creates Pisacane; it irradiates the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30130:great on earth; it was while proceeding whither its breath urge them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30131:that Byron perished at Missolonghi, and that Mazet died at Barcelona;
tests/les_miserables.txt:30132:it is the tribune under the feet of Mirabeau, and a crater under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30133:feet of Robespierre; its books, its theatre, its art, its science, its
tests/les_miserables.txt:30134:literature, its philosophy, are the manuals of the human race; it has
tests/les_miserables.txt:30135:Pascal, Régnier, Corneille, Descartes, Jean-Jacques: Voltaire for all
tests/les_miserables.txt:30136:moments, Molière for all centuries; it makes its language to be talked
tests/les_miserables.txt:30137:by the universal mouth, and that language becomes the word; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:30138:constructs in all minds the idea of progress, the liberating dogmas
tests/les_miserables.txt:30139:which it forges are for the generations trusty friends, and it is with
tests/les_miserables.txt:30141:have been made since 1789; this does not prevent vagabondism, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30142:enormous genius which is called Paris, while transfiguring the world by
tests/les_miserables.txt:30143:its light, sketches in charcoal Bouginier’s nose on the wall of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30146:Paris is always showing its teeth; when it is not scolding it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:30149:Such is Paris. The smoke of its roofs forms the ideas of the universe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30151:is more than great, it is immense. Why? Because it is daring.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30153:To dare; that is the price of progress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30155:All sublime conquests are, more or less, the prizes of daring. In order
tests/les_miserables.txt:30156:that the Revolution should take place, it does not suffice that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30157:Montesquieu should foresee it, that Diderot should preach it, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30158:Beaumarchais should announce it, that Condorcet should calculate it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30160:is necessary that Danton should dare it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30162:The cry: _Audacity! _ is a _Fiat lux_. It is necessary, for the sake of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30163:the forward march of the human race, that there should be proud lessons
tests/les_miserables.txt:30164:of courage permanently on the heights. Daring deeds dazzle history and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30165:are one of man’s great sources of light. The dawn dares when it rises.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30167:self, to grasp fate bodily, to astound catastrophe by the small amount
tests/les_miserables.txt:30168:of fear that it occasions us, now to affront unjust power, again to
tests/les_miserables.txt:30169:insult drunken victory, to hold one’s position, to stand one’s ground;
tests/les_miserables.txt:30170:that is the example which nations need, that is the light which
tests/les_miserables.txt:30171:electrifies them. The same formidable lightning proceeds from the torch
tests/les_miserables.txt:30180:As for the Parisian populace, even when a man grown, it is always the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30181:street Arab; to paint the child is to paint the city; and it is for
tests/les_miserables.txt:30183:is in the faubourgs, above all, we maintain, that the Parisian race
tests/les_miserables.txt:30185:this people toils and suffers, and suffering and toil are the two faces
tests/les_miserables.txt:30188:knacker of Montfaucon. _Fex urbis_, exclaims Cicero; _mob_, adds Burke,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30189:indignantly; rabble, multitude, populace. These are words and quickly
tests/les_miserables.txt:30191:go barefoot! They do not know how to read; so much the worse. Would you
tests/les_miserables.txt:30193:malediction? Cannot the light penetrate these masses? Let us return to
tests/les_miserables.txt:30194:that cry: Light! and let us obstinately persist therein! Light! Light!
tests/les_miserables.txt:30195:Who knows whether these opacities will not become transparent? Are not
tests/les_miserables.txt:30196:revolutions transfigurations? Come, philosophers, teach, enlighten,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30198:fraternize with the public place, announce the good news, spend your
tests/les_miserables.txt:30199:alphabets lavishly, proclaim rights, sing the Marseillaises, sow
tests/les_miserables.txt:30201:idea. This crowd may be rendered sublime. Let us learn how to make use
tests/les_miserables.txt:30202:of that vast conflagration of principles and virtues, which sparkles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30203:bursts forth and quivers at certain hours. These bare feet, these bare
tests/les_miserables.txt:30204:arms, these rags, these ignorances, these abjectnesses, these
tests/les_miserables.txt:30205:darknesses, may be employed in the conquest of the ideal. Gaze past the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30206:people, and you will perceive truth. Let that vile sand which you
tests/les_miserables.txt:30207:trample under foot be cast into the furnace, let it melt and seethe
tests/les_miserables.txt:30208:there, it will become a splendid crystal, and it is thanks to it that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30209:Galileo and Newton will discover stars.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30219:[Illustration: Little Gavroche]
tests/les_miserables.txt:30222:Eight or nine years after the events narrated in the second part of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30223:this story, people noticed on the Boulevard du Temple, and in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30225:age, who would have realized with tolerable accuracy that ideal of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30226:gamin sketched out above, if, with the laugh of his age on his lips, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:30227:had not had a heart absolutely sombre and empty. This child was well
tests/les_miserables.txt:30229:his father, and a woman’s chemise, but he did not get it from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:30230:mother. Some people or other had clothed him in rags out of charity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30234:He was one of those children most deserving of pity, among all, one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30237:This child never felt so well as when he was in the street. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:30240:His parents had despatched him into life with a kick.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30245:vivacious but sickly air. He went and came, sang, played at hopscotch,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30246:scraped the gutters, stole a little, but, like cats and sparrows, gayly
tests/les_miserables.txt:30247:laughed when he was called a rogue, and got angry when called a thief.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30248:He had no shelter, no bread, no fire, no love; but he was merry because
tests/les_miserables.txt:30251:When these poor creatures grow to be men, the millstones of the social
tests/les_miserables.txt:30252:order meet them and crush them, but so long as they are children, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:30253:escape because of their smallness. The tiniest hole saves them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30255:Nevertheless, abandoned as this child was, it sometimes happened, every
tests/les_miserables.txt:30257:he quitted the boulevard, the Cirque, the Porte Saint-Martin, descended
tests/les_miserables.txt:30258:to the quays, crossed the bridges, reached the suburbs, arrived at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30259:Salpêtrière, and came to a halt, where? Precisely at that double number
tests/les_miserables.txt:30260:50-52 with which the reader is acquainted—at the Gorbeau hovel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30262:At that epoch, the hovel 50-52 generally deserted and eternally
tests/les_miserables.txt:30263:decorated with the placard: “Chambers to let,” chanced to be, a rare
tests/les_miserables.txt:30265:case in Paris, had no connection with each other. All belonged to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30266:indigent class which begins to separate from the lowest of petty
tests/les_miserables.txt:30267:bourgeoisie in straitened circumstances, and which extends from misery
tests/les_miserables.txt:30268:to misery into the lowest depths of society down to those two beings in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30269:whom all the material things of civilization end, the sewer-man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:30270:sweeps up the mud, and the rag-picker who collects scraps.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30272:The “principal lodger” of Jean Valjean’s day was dead and had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:30273:replaced by another exactly like her. I know not what philosopher has
tests/les_miserables.txt:30274:said: “Old women are never lacking.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30278:about her life except a dynasty of three paroquets, who had reigned in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30279:succession over her soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30282:four persons, consisting of father, mother, and two daughters, already
tests/les_miserables.txt:30283:well grown, all four of whom were lodged in the same attic, one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30284:cells which we have already mentioned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30286:At first sight, this family presented no very special feature except
tests/les_miserables.txt:30287:its extreme destitution; the father, when he hired the chamber, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:30289:which had borne a singular resemblance to _the entrance of nothing at
tests/les_miserables.txt:30290:all_, to borrow the memorable expression of the principal tenant, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:30291:Jondrette had said to the woman, who, like her predecessor, was at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30293:should chance to come and inquire for a Pole or an Italian, or even a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30294:Spaniard, perchance, it is I.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30298:found distress, and, what is still sadder, no smile; a cold hearth and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30299:cold hearts. When he entered, he was asked: “Whence come you?” He
tests/les_miserables.txt:30302:“What did you come here for?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30305:This child lived, in this absence of affection, like the pale plants
tests/les_miserables.txt:30306:which spring up in cellars. It did not cause him suffering, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:30307:blamed no one. He did not know exactly how a father and mother should
tests/les_miserables.txt:30313:child was called Little Gavroche. Why was he called Little Gavroche?
tests/les_miserables.txt:30315:Probably because his father’s name was Jondrette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30317:It seems to be the instinct of certain wretched families to break the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30320:The chamber which the Jondrettes inhabited in the Gorbeau hovel was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30321:last at the end of the corridor. The cell next to it was occupied by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30322:very poor young man who was called M. Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30337:In the Rue Boucherat, Rue de Normandie and the Rue de Saintonge there
tests/les_miserables.txt:30338:still exist a few ancient inhabitants who have preserved the memory of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30340:complaisance. This good man was old when they were young. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:30342:melancholy that vague swarm of shadows which is called the past—from
tests/les_miserables.txt:30343:the labyrinth of streets in the vicinity of the Temple to which, under
tests/les_miserables.txt:30344:Louis XIV., the names of all the provinces of France were appended
tests/les_miserables.txt:30345:exactly as in our day, the streets of the new Tivoli quarter have
tests/les_miserables.txt:30346:received the names of all the capitals of Europe; a progression, by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30347:way, in which progress is visible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30349:M. Gillenormand, who was as much alive as possible in 1831, was one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30350:those men who had become curiosities to be viewed, simply because they
tests/les_miserables.txt:30351:have lived a long time, and who are strange because they formerly
tests/les_miserables.txt:30352:resembled everybody, and now resemble nobody. He was a peculiar old
tests/les_miserables.txt:30353:man, and in very truth, a man of another age, the real, complete and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30354:rather haughty bourgeois of the eighteenth century, who wore his good,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30355:old bourgeoisie with the air with which marquises wear their
tests/les_miserables.txt:30356:marquisates. He was over ninety years of age, his walk was erect, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:30357:talked loudly, saw clearly, drank neat, ate, slept, and snored. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:30358:all thirty-two of his teeth. He only wore spectacles when he read. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:30359:was of an amorous disposition, but declared that, for the last ten
tests/les_miserables.txt:30360:years, he had wholly and decidedly renounced women. He could no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:30362:He said: “If I were not ruined—Héée!” All he had left, in fact, was an
tests/les_miserables.txt:30363:income of about fifteen thousand francs. His dream was to come into an
tests/les_miserables.txt:30364:inheritance and to have a hundred thousand livres income for
tests/les_miserables.txt:30365:mistresses. He did not belong, as the reader will perceive, to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30366:puny variety of octogenaries who, like M. de Voltaire, have been dying
tests/les_miserables.txt:30367:all their life; his was no longevity of a cracked pot; this jovial old
tests/les_miserables.txt:30368:man had always had good health. He was superficial, rapid, easily
tests/les_miserables.txt:30369:angered. He flew into a passion at everything, generally quite contrary
tests/les_miserables.txt:30370:to all reason. When contradicted, he raised his cane; he beat people as
tests/les_miserables.txt:30371:he had done in the great century. He had a daughter over fifty years of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30372:age, and unmarried, whom he chastised severely with his tongue, when in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30375:carogne!” One of his oaths was: “By the pantoufloche of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30376:pantouflochade!” He had singular freaks of tranquillity; he had himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:30378:being jealous of M. Gillenormand on account of his wife, a pretty and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30379:coquettish barberess. M. Gillenormand admired his own discernment in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30380:all things, and declared that he was extremely sagacious; here is one
tests/les_miserables.txt:30382:when a flea bites me, from what woman it came.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30385:The words which he uttered the most frequently were: _the sensible
tests/les_miserables.txt:30387:acceptation which our epoch has accorded to it, but he made it enter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30388:after his own fashion, into his little chimney-corner satires:
tests/les_miserables.txt:30389:“Nature,” he said, “in order that civilization may have a little of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30390:everything, gives it even specimens of its amusing barbarism. Europe
tests/les_miserables.txt:30391:possesses specimens of Asia and Africa on a small scale. The cat is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30392:drawing-room tiger, the lizard is a pocket crocodile. The dancers at
tests/les_miserables.txt:30393:the opera are pink female savages. They do not eat men, they crunch
tests/les_miserables.txt:30394:them; or, magicians that they are, they transform them into oysters and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30396:shell. Such are our morals. We do not devour, we gnaw; we do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:30397:exterminate, we claw.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30407:house. This house has since been demolished and rebuilt, and the number
tests/les_miserables.txt:30408:has probably been changed in those revolutions of numeration which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30409:streets of Paris undergo. He occupied an ancient and vast apartment on
tests/les_miserables.txt:30411:ceilings with great Gobelins and Beauvais tapestries representing
tests/les_miserables.txt:30412:pastoral scenes; the subjects of the ceilings and the panels were
tests/les_miserables.txt:30413:repeated in miniature on the armchairs. He enveloped his bed in a vast,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30414:nine-leaved screen of Coromandel lacquer. Long, full curtains hung from
tests/les_miserables.txt:30415:the windows, and formed great, broken folds that were very magnificent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30416:The garden situated immediately under his windows was attached to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30417:one of them which formed the angle, by means of a staircase twelve or
tests/les_miserables.txt:30418:fifteen steps long, which the old gentleman ascended and descended with
tests/les_miserables.txt:30419:great agility. In addition to a library adjoining his chamber, he had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30420:boudoir of which he thought a great deal, a gallant and elegant
tests/les_miserables.txt:30421:retreat, with magnificent hangings of straw, with a pattern of flowers
tests/les_miserables.txt:30423:convicts by M. de Vivonne for his mistress. M. Gillenormand had
tests/les_miserables.txt:30425:centenarian. He had had two wives. His manners were something between
tests/les_miserables.txt:30426:those of the courtier, which he had never been, and the lawyer, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:30427:he might have been. He was gay, and caressing when he had a mind. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:30428:his youth he had been one of those men who are always deceived by their
tests/les_miserables.txt:30429:wives and never by their mistresses, because they are, at the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:30430:time, the most sullen of husbands and the most charming of lovers in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30431:existence. He was a connoisseur of painting. He had in his chamber a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30432:marvellous portrait of no one knows whom, painted by Jordaens, executed
tests/les_miserables.txt:30433:with great dashes of the brush, with millions of details, in a confused
tests/les_miserables.txt:30435:Louis XIV. nor yet that of Louis XVI.; it was that of the Incroyables
tests/les_miserables.txt:30436:of the Directory. He had thought himself young up to that period and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30437:had followed the fashions. His coat was of light-weight cloth with
tests/les_miserables.txt:30439:this he wore knee-breeches and buckle shoes. He always thrust his hands
tests/les_miserables.txt:30440:into his fobs. He said authoritatively: “The French Revolution is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30441:heap of blackguards.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30452:time—ripe and celebrated beauties then, and sung by Voltaire, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30453:Camargo and the Sallé. Caught between two fires, he had beaten a heroic
tests/les_miserables.txt:30454:retreat towards a little dancer, a young girl named Nahenry, who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:30455:sixteen like himself, obscure as a cat, and with whom he was in love.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30456:He abounded in memories. He was accustomed to exclaim: “How pretty she
tests/les_miserables.txt:30458:Longchamps, her hair curled in sustained sentiments, with her
tests/les_miserables.txt:30459:come-and-see of turquoises, her gown of the color of persons newly
tests/les_miserables.txt:30461:manhood a waistcoat of Nain-Londrin, which he was fond of talking about
tests/les_miserables.txt:30463:he. Madame de Boufflers, having seen him by chance when he was twenty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30464:had described him as “a charming fool.” He was horrified by all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30465:names which he saw in politics and in power, regarding them as vulgar
tests/les_miserables.txt:30469:for you! I can imagine this in a journal: ‘M. Gillenorman, minister!’
tests/les_miserables.txt:30470:that would be a farce. Well! They are so stupid that it would pass”; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:30471:merrily called everything by its name, whether decent or indecent, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30472:did not restrain himself in the least before ladies. He uttered coarse
tests/les_miserables.txt:30473:speeches, obscenities, and filth with a certain tranquillity and lack
tests/les_miserables.txt:30474:of astonishment which was elegant. It was in keeping with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30475:unceremoniousness of his century. It is to be noted that the age of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30476:periphrase in verse was the age of crudities in prose. His god-father
tests/les_miserables.txt:30477:had predicted that he would turn out a man of genius, and had bestowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:30478:on him these two significant names: Luc-Esprit.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30487:was born, and he had been crowned by the hand of the Duc de Nivernais,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30488:whom he called the Duc de Nevers. Neither the Convention, nor the death
tests/les_miserables.txt:30490:anything else had been able to efface the memory of this crowning. _The
tests/les_miserables.txt:30491:Duc de Nevers_ was, in his eyes, the great figure of the century. “What
tests/les_miserables.txt:30492:a charming grand seigneur,” he said, “and what a fine air he had with
tests/les_miserables.txt:30496:In the eyes of M. Gillenormand, Catherine the Second had made
tests/les_miserables.txt:30497:reparation for the crime of the partition of Poland by purchasing, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:30498:three thousand roubles, the secret of the elixir of gold, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:30499:Bestucheff. He grew animated on this subject: “The elixir of gold,” he
tests/les_miserables.txt:30500:exclaimed, “the yellow dye of Bestucheff, General Lamotte’s drops, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30501:the eighteenth century,—this was the great remedy for the catastrophes
tests/les_miserables.txt:30502:of love, the panacea against Venus, at one louis the half-ounce phial.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30504:been greatly irritated and thrown off his balance, had any one told him
tests/les_miserables.txt:30505:that the elixir of gold is nothing but the perchloride of iron. M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30509:and cleverness in order to escape having his head cut off. If any young
tests/les_miserables.txt:30510:man ventured to pronounce an eulogium on the Republic in his presence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30513:that I shall not see ninety-three twice.” On these occasions, he hinted
tests/les_miserables.txt:30523:of women, and when he has himself a wife for whom he cares but little,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30524:who is homely, cross, legitimate, with plenty of rights, perched on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30525:code, and jealous at need, there is but one way of extricating himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:30526:from the quandry and of procuring peace, and that is to let his wife
tests/les_miserables.txt:30527:control the purse-strings. This abdication sets him free. Then his wife
tests/les_miserables.txt:30528:busies herself, grows passionately fond of handling coin, gets her
tests/les_miserables.txt:30529:fingers covered with verdigris in the process, undertakes the education
tests/les_miserables.txt:30530:of half-share tenants and the training of farmers, convokes lawyers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30531:presides over notaries, harangues scriveners, visits limbs of the law,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30532:follows lawsuits, draws up leases, dictates contracts, feels herself
tests/les_miserables.txt:30533:the sovereign, sells, buys, regulates, promises and compromises, binds
tests/les_miserables.txt:30534:fast and annuls, yields, concedes and retrocedes, arranges,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30535:disarranges, hoards, lavishes; she commits follies, a supreme and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30536:personal delight, and that consoles her. While her husband disdains
tests/les_miserables.txt:30537:her, she has the satisfaction of ruining her husband.” This theory M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30538:Gillenormand had himself applied, and it had become his history. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:30539:wife—the second one—had administered his fortune in such a manner that,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30541:remained to him just sufficient to live on, by sinking nearly the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:30542:of it in an annuity of fifteen thousand francs, three-quarters of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:30544:anxious to leave a property behind him. Besides, he had noticed that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30545:patrimonies are subject to adventures, and, for instance, become
tests/les_miserables.txt:30546:_national property_; he had been present at the avatars of consolidated
tests/les_miserables.txt:30547:three per cents, and he had no great faith in the Great Book of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30548:Public Debt. “All that’s the Rue Quincampois!” he said. His house in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30552:on the men the name of their province: Nîmois, Comtois, Poitevin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30553:Picard. His last valet was a big, foundered, short-winded fellow of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30554:fifty-five, who was incapable of running twenty paces; but, as he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:30555:been born at Bayonne, M. Gillenormand called him _Basque_. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30556:female servants in his house were called Nicolette (even the Magnon, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30557:whom we shall hear more farther on). One day, a haughty cook, a cordon
tests/les_miserables.txt:30558:bleu, of the lofty race of porters, presented herself. “How much wages
tests/les_miserables.txt:30559:do you want a month?” asked M. Gillenormand. “Thirty francs.” “What is
tests/les_miserables.txt:30560:your name?” “Olympie.” “You shall have fifty francs, and you shall be
tests/les_miserables.txt:30561:called Nicolette.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30570:With M. Gillenormand, sorrow was converted into wrath; he was furious
tests/les_miserables.txt:30571:at being in despair. He had all sorts of prejudices and took all sorts
tests/les_miserables.txt:30572:of liberties. One of the facts of which his exterior relief and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:30573:internal satisfaction was composed, was, as we have just hinted, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:30574:he had remained a brisk spark, and that he passed energetically for
tests/les_miserables.txt:30575:such. This he called having “royal renown.” This royal renown sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:30578:newly born boy, who was yelling like the deuce, and duly wrapped in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30579:swaddling-clothes, which a servant-maid, dismissed six months
tests/les_miserables.txt:30581:completed his eighty-fourth year. Indignation and uproar in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30582:establishment. And whom did that bold hussy think she could persuade to
tests/les_miserables.txt:30583:believe that? What audacity! What an abominable calumny! M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30585:the amiable smile of a good man who is flattered by the calumny, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30587:taken aback, and really, you are excessively ignorant. M. le Duc
tests/les_miserables.txt:30590:brother to the Cardinal de Sourdis, Archbishop of Bordeaux, had, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30591:age of eighty-three, by the maid of Madame la Présidente Jacquin, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30592:son, a real child of love, who became a Chevalier of Malta and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30593:counsellor of state; one of the great men of this century, the Abbé
tests/les_miserables.txt:30595:the ordinary in these things. And then, the Bible! Upon that I declare
tests/les_miserables.txt:30596:that this little gentleman is none of mine. Let him be taken care of.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30597:It is not his fault.” This manner of procedure was good-tempered. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:30598:woman, whose name was Magnon, sent him another parcel in the following
tests/les_miserables.txt:30599:year. It was a boy again. Thereupon, M. Gillenormand capitulated. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:30600:sent the two brats back to their mother, promising to pay eighty francs
tests/les_miserables.txt:30601:a month for their maintenance, on the condition that the said mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:30605:rector of the Academy of Poitiers for three and thirty years, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:30607:whom but little memory remains, was a peaceable miser, who, being a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30609:but he never gave them anything except bad or demonetized sous, thereby
tests/les_miserables.txt:30610:discovering a means of going to hell by way of paradise. As for M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30612:gladly and nobly. He was kindly, abrupt, charitable, and if he had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:30613:rich, his turn of mind would have been magnificent. He desired that all
tests/les_miserables.txt:30614:which concerned him should be done in a grand manner, even his
tests/les_miserables.txt:30615:rogueries. One day, having been cheated by a business man in a matter
tests/les_miserables.txt:30616:of inheritance, in a gross and apparent manner, he uttered this solemn
tests/les_miserables.txt:30617:exclamation: “That was indecently done! I am really ashamed of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:30618:pilfering. Everything has degenerated in this century, even the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30619:rascals. Morbleu! this is not the way to rob a man of my standing. I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:30620:robbed as though in a forest, but badly robbed. _Silvæ sint consule
tests/les_miserables.txt:30623:second another daughter, who had died at about the age of thirty, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:30624:had wedded, through love, or chance, or otherwise, a soldier of fortune
tests/les_miserables.txt:30625:who had served in the armies of the Republic and of the Empire, who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:30626:won the cross at Austerlitz and had been made colonel at Waterloo. _“He
tests/les_miserables.txt:30627:is the disgrace of my family,” _ said the old bourgeois. He took an
tests/les_miserables.txt:30628:immense amount of snuff, and had a particularly graceful manner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30629:plucking at his lace ruffle with the back of one hand. He believed very
tests/les_miserables.txt:30638:Such was M. Luc-Esprit Gillenormand, who had not lost his hair,—which
tests/les_miserables.txt:30639:was gray rather than white,—and which was always dressed in “dog’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:30642:He had something of the eighteenth century about him; frivolous and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30647:Saint Germain, Rue Servandoni, near Saint-Sulpice. He had only retired
tests/les_miserables.txt:30648:to the Marais when he quitted society, long after attaining the age of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30651:And, on abandoning society, he had immured himself in his habits. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:30652:principal one, and that which was invariable, was to keep his door
tests/les_miserables.txt:30653:absolutely closed during the day, and never to receive any one whatever
tests/les_miserables.txt:30654:except in the evening. He dined at five o’clock, and after that his
tests/les_miserables.txt:30655:door was open. That had been the fashion of his century, and he would
tests/les_miserables.txt:30657:closed shutter. Fashionable people only light up their minds when the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30658:zenith lights up its stars.” And he barricaded himself against every
tests/les_miserables.txt:30660:elegance of his day.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30668:We have just spoken of M. Gillenormand’s two daughters. They had come
tests/les_miserables.txt:30670:little resemblance to each other, either in character or countenance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30671:and had also been as little like sisters to each other as possible. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:30672:youngest had a charming soul, which turned towards all that belongs to
tests/les_miserables.txt:30673:the light, was occupied with flowers, with verses, with music, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:30674:fluttered away into glorious space, enthusiastic, ethereal, and was
tests/les_miserables.txt:30675:wedded from her very youth, in ideal, to a vague and heroic figure. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:30676:elder had also her chimera; she espied in the azure some very wealthy
tests/les_miserables.txt:30677:purveyor, a contractor, a splendidly stupid husband, a million made
tests/les_miserables.txt:30678:man, or even a prefect; the receptions of the Prefecture, an usher in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30679:the antechamber with a chain on his neck, official balls, the harangues
tests/les_miserables.txt:30680:of the town-hall, to be “Madame la Préfète,”—all this had created a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30681:whirlwind in her imagination. Thus the two sisters strayed, each in her
tests/les_miserables.txt:30682:own dream, at the epoch when they were young girls. Both had wings, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30686:becomes terrestrial in our day. The younger wedded the man of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:30689:At the moment when she makes her entrance into this history which we
tests/les_miserables.txt:30690:are relating, she was an antique virtue, an incombustible prude, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:30692:possible to see. A characteristic detail; outside of her immediate
tests/les_miserables.txt:30693:family, no one had ever known her first name. She was called
tests/les_miserables.txt:30696:In the matter of _cant_, Mademoiselle Gillenormand could have given
tests/les_miserables.txt:30697:points to a miss. Her modesty was carried to the other extreme of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30698:blackness. She cherished a frightful memory of her life; one day, a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:30701:Age had only served to accentuate this pitiless modesty. Her guimpe was
tests/les_miserables.txt:30702:never sufficiently opaque, and never ascended sufficiently high. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:30703:multiplied clasps and pins where no one would have dreamed of looking.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30704:The peculiarity of prudery is to place all the more sentinels in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30705:proportion as the fortress is the less menaced.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30707:Nevertheless, let him who can explain these antique mysteries of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30708:innocence, she allowed an officer of the Lancers, her grand nephew,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30709:named Théodule, to embrace her without displeasure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30711:In spite of this favored Lancer, the label: _Prude_, under which we
tests/les_miserables.txt:30712:have classed her, suited her to absolute perfection. Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:30714:a demi-vice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30717:the society of the Virgin, wore a white veil on certain festivals,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30718:mumbled special orisons, revered “the holy blood,” venerated “the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30719:sacred heart,” remained for hours in contemplation before a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30720:rococo-jesuit altar in a chapel which was inaccessible to the rank and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30722:clouds of marble, and through great rays of gilded wood.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30724:She had a chapel friend, an ancient virgin like herself, named
tests/les_miserables.txt:30725:Mademoiselle Vaubois, who was a positive blockhead, and beside whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:30728:anything except of the different ways of making preserves. Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:30729:Vaubois, perfect in her style, was the ermine of stupidity without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30730:single spot of intelligence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30733:lost as she grew older. This is the case with passive natures. She had
tests/les_miserables.txt:30734:never been malicious, which is relative kindness; and then, years wear
tests/les_miserables.txt:30735:away the angles, and the softening which comes with time had come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:30736:her. She was melancholy with an obscure sadness of which she did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:30737:herself know the secret. There breathed from her whole person the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30738:stupor of a life that was finished, and which had never had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30743:These households comprised of an old man and an old spinster are not
tests/les_miserables.txt:30744:rare, and always have the touching aspect of two weaknesses leaning on
tests/les_miserables.txt:30745:each other for support.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30748:old man, a child, a little boy, who was always trembling and mute in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30749:the presence of M. Gillenormand. M. Gillenormand never addressed this
tests/les_miserables.txt:30750:child except in a severe voice, and sometimes, with uplifted cane:
tests/les_miserables.txt:30751:“Here, sir! rascal, scoundrel, come here!—Answer me, you scamp! Just
tests/les_miserables.txt:30752:let me see you, you good-for-nothing!” etc., etc. He idolized him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30754:This was his grandson. We shall meet with this child again later on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30768:many very good and very aristocratic salons. Although a bourgeois, M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30769:Gillenormand was received in society. As he had a double measure of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30770:wit, in the first place, that which was born with him, and secondly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30771:that which was attributed to him, he was even sought out and made much
tests/les_miserables.txt:30772:of. He never went anywhere except on condition of being the chief
tests/les_miserables.txt:30773:person there. There are people who will have influence at any price,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30775:cannot be oracles, they turn wags. M. Gillenormand was not of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:30776:nature; his domination in the Royalist salons which he frequented cost
tests/les_miserables.txt:30777:his self-respect nothing. He was an oracle everywhere. It had happened
tests/les_miserables.txt:30783:worthy and respectable person, whose husband had been Ambassador of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30784:France to Berlin under Louis XVI. Baron de T., who, during his
tests/les_miserables.txt:30785:lifetime, had gone very passionately into ecstasies and magnetic
tests/les_miserables.txt:30787:entire fortune, some very curious Memoirs about Mesmer and his tub, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30788:ten manuscript volumes, bound in red morocco and gilded on the edges.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30790:maintained herself on a meagre income which had survived no one knew
tests/les_miserables.txt:30793:Madame de T. lived far from the Court; “a very mixed society,” as she
tests/les_miserables.txt:30795:twice a week about her widowed hearth, and these constituted a purely
tests/les_miserables.txt:30796:Royalist salon. They sipped tea there, and uttered groans or cries of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30797:horror at the century, the charter, the Bonapartists, the prostitution
tests/les_miserables.txt:30798:of the blue ribbon, or the Jacobinism of Louis XVIII., according as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30800:the hopes which were presented by Monsieur, afterwards Charles X.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30802:The songs of the fishwomen, in which Napoleon was called _Nicolas_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30803:were received there with transports of joy. Duchesses, the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:30804:delicate and charming women in the world, went into ecstasies over
tests/les_miserables.txt:30805:couplets like the following, addressed to “the federates”:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:30807:Refoncez dans vos culottes
tests/les_miserables.txt:30808:Le bout d’ chemis’ qui vous pend.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30810:Ont arboré l’ drapeau blanc?20
tests/les_miserables.txt:30813:There they amused themselves with puns which were considered terrible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30814:with innocent plays upon words which they supposed to be venomous, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:30815:quatrains, with distiches even; thus, upon the Dessolles ministry, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30816:moderate cabinet, of which MM. Decazes and Deserre were members:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:30819:Il faut changer de sol, et de serre et de case.21
tests/les_miserables.txt:30822:Or they drew up a list of the chamber of peers, “an abominably Jacobin
tests/les_miserables.txt:30823:chamber,” and from this list they combined alliances of names, in such
tests/les_miserables.txt:30825:Sabran. Gouvion-Saint-Cyr_.—All this was done merrily. In that society,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30834:Songs are like the guillotine; they chop away indifferently, to-day
tests/les_miserables.txt:30837:In the Fualdès affair, which belongs to this epoch, 1816, they took
tests/les_miserables.txt:30838:part for Bastide and Jausion, because Fualdès was “a Buonapartist.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30840:constituted the most deadly insult.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30842:Like certain church towers, Madame de T.’s salon had two cocks. One of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30844:whom it was whispered about, with a sort of respect: “Do you know? That
tests/les_miserables.txt:30845:is the Lamothe of the affair of the necklace.” These singular amnesties
tests/les_miserables.txt:30846:do occur in parties.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30848:Let us add the following: in the bourgeoisie, honored situations decay
tests/les_miserables.txt:30850:same way that there is a loss of caloric in the vicinity of those who
tests/les_miserables.txt:30851:are cold, there is a diminution of consideration in the approach of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30852:despised persons. The ancient society of the upper classes held
tests/les_miserables.txt:30854:of the Pompadour, had his entry with M. le Prince de Soubise. In spite
tests/les_miserables.txt:30855:of? No, because. Du Barry, the god-father of the Vaubernier, was very
tests/les_miserables.txt:30856:welcome at the house of M. le Maréchal de Richelieu. This society is
tests/les_miserables.txt:30857:Olympus. Mercury and the Prince de Guémenée are at home there. A thief
tests/les_miserables.txt:30861:of age, had nothing remarkable about him except his silent and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30862:sententious air, his cold and angular face, his perfectly polished
tests/les_miserables.txt:30863:manners, his coat buttoned up to his cravat, and his long legs always
tests/les_miserables.txt:30864:crossed in long, flabby trousers of the hue of burnt sienna. His face
tests/les_miserables.txt:30865:was the same color as his trousers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30867:This M. de Lamothe was “held in consideration” in this salon on account
tests/les_miserables.txt:30868:of his “celebrity” and, strange to say, though true, because of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:30871:As for M. Gillenormand, his consideration was of absolutely first-rate
tests/les_miserables.txt:30873:any way with his dignity, a certain manner about him which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:30875:great age added to it. One is not a century with impunity. The years
tests/les_miserables.txt:30876:finally produce around a head a venerable dishevelment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30878:In addition to this, he said things which had the genuine sparkle of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30879:the old rock. Thus, when the King of Prussia, after having restored
tests/les_miserables.txt:30880:Louis XVIII., came to pay the latter a visit under the name of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30881:Count de Ruppin, he was received by the descendant of Louis XIV.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30883:most delicate impertinence. M. Gillenormand approved: “All kings who
tests/les_miserables.txt:30884:are not the King of France,” said he, “are provincial kings.” One day,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30886:presence: “To what was the editor of the _Courrier Français_
tests/les_miserables.txt:30887:condemned?” “To be suspended.” “_Sus_ is superfluous,” observed M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30891:said, on seeing M. de Talleyrand pass by: “There goes his Excellency
tests/les_miserables.txt:30895:M. Gillenormand was always accompanied by his daughter, that tall
tests/les_miserables.txt:30898:eyes, who never appeared in that salon without hearing voices murmur
tests/les_miserables.txt:30899:around him: “How handsome he is! What a pity! Poor child!” This child
tests/les_miserables.txt:30900:was the one of whom we dropped a word a while ago. He was called “poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:30901:child,” because he had for a father “a brigand of the Loire.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:30905:already been mentioned, and whom M. Gillenormand called “the disgrace
tests/les_miserables.txt:30915:Any one who had chanced to pass through the little town of Vernon at
tests/les_miserables.txt:30916:this epoch, and who had happened to walk across that fine monumental
tests/les_miserables.txt:30917:bridge, which will soon be succeeded, let us hope, by some hideous iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:30918:cable bridge, might have observed, had he dropped his eyes over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30919:parapet, a man about fifty years of age wearing a leather cap, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30920:trousers and a waistcoat of coarse gray cloth, to which something
tests/les_miserables.txt:30921:yellow which had been a red ribbon, was sewn, shod with wooden sabots,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30922:tanned by the sun, his face nearly black and his hair nearly white, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30923:large scar on his forehead which ran down upon his cheek, bowed, bent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30924:prematurely aged, who walked nearly every day, hoe and sickle in hand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30925:in one of those compartments surrounded by walls which abut on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30926:bridge, and border the left bank of the Seine like a chain of terraces,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30927:charming enclosures full of flowers of which one could say, were they
tests/les_miserables.txt:30928:much larger: “these are gardens,” and were they a little smaller:
tests/les_miserables.txt:30929:“these are bouquets.” All these enclosures abut upon the river at one
tests/les_miserables.txt:30930:end, and on a house at the other. The man in the waistcoat and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30932:these enclosures and the most humble of these houses about 1817. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:30935:nor a bourgeoise, who served him. The plot of earth which he called his
tests/les_miserables.txt:30936:garden was celebrated in the town for the beauty of the flowers which
tests/les_miserables.txt:30937:he cultivated there. These flowers were his occupation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30939:By dint of labor, of perseverance, of attention, and of buckets of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30940:water, he had succeeded in creating after the Creator, and he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:30941:invented certain tulips and certain dahlias which seemed to have been
tests/les_miserables.txt:30943:Bodin in the formation of little clumps of earth of heath mould, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:30944:the cultivation of rare and precious shrubs from America and China. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:30945:was in his alleys from the break of day, in summer, planting, cutting,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30949:a child in a house, or with his eyes fixed on a drop of dew at the tip
tests/les_miserables.txt:30950:of a spear of grass, of which the sun made a carbuncle. His table was
tests/les_miserables.txt:30951:very plain, and he drank more milk than wine. A child could make him
tests/les_miserables.txt:30952:give way, and his servant scolded him. He was so timid that he seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:30954:tapped at his pane and his curé, the Abbé Mabeuf, a good old man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30956:chance comers, curious to see his tulips, rang at his little cottage,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30962:struck by a name which occurs there with tolerable frequency, the name
tests/les_miserables.txt:30963:of Georges Pontmercy. When very young, this Georges Pontmercy had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:30966:old regiments of the monarchy preserved their names of provinces even
tests/les_miserables.txt:30967:after the fall of the monarchy, and were only divided into brigades in
tests/les_miserables.txt:30968:1794. Pontmercy fought at Spire, at Worms, at Neustadt, at Turkheim, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:30969:Alzey, at Mayence, where he was one of the two hundred who formed
tests/les_miserables.txt:30970:Houchard’s rearguard. It was the twelfth to hold its ground against the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30971:corps of the Prince of Hesse, behind the old rampart of Andernach, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30972:only rejoined the main body of the army when the enemy’s cannon had
tests/les_miserables.txt:30973:opened a breach from the cord of the parapet to the foot of the glacis.
tests/les_miserables.txt:30974:He was under Kléber at Marchiennes and at the battle of Mont-Palissel,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30975:where a ball from a biscaïen broke his arm. Then he passed to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30978:adjutant-general, and Pontmercy sub-lieutenant. Pontmercy was by
tests/les_miserables.txt:30980:which caused Bonaparte to say: “Berthier has been cannoneer, cavalier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:30983:Having been embarked with his company in the exigencies of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30984:campaign, on board a pinnace which was proceeding from Genoa to some
tests/les_miserables.txt:30985:obscure port on the coast, he fell into a wasps’-nest of seven or eight
tests/les_miserables.txt:30986:English vessels. The Genoese commander wanted to throw his cannon into
tests/les_miserables.txt:30987:the sea, to hide the soldiers between decks, and to slip along in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30988:dark as a merchant vessel. Pontmercy had the colors hoisted to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:30990:Twenty leagues further on, his audacity having increased, he attacked
tests/les_miserables.txt:30991:with his pinnace, and captured a large English transport which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:30992:carrying troops to Sicily, and which was so loaded down with men and
tests/les_miserables.txt:30994:in that Malher division which took Günzberg from the Archduke
tests/les_miserables.txt:30995:Ferdinand. At Weltingen he received into his arms, beneath a storm of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30998:march in echelons effected under the enemy’s fire. When the cavalry of
tests/les_miserables.txt:30999:the Imperial Russian Guard crushed a battalion of the 4th of the line,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31000:Pontmercy was one of those who took their revenge and overthrew the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31001:Guard. The Emperor gave him the cross. Pontmercy saw Wurmser at Mantua,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31002:Mélas, and Alexandria, Mack at Ulm, made prisoners in succession. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:31003:formed a part of the eighth corps of the grand army which Mortier
tests/les_miserables.txt:31004:commanded, and which captured Hamburg. Then he was transferred to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31005:55th of the line, which was the old regiment of Flanders. At Eylau he
tests/les_miserables.txt:31006:was in the cemetery where, for the space of two hours, the heroic
tests/les_miserables.txt:31007:Captain Louis Hugo, the uncle of the author of this book, sustained
tests/les_miserables.txt:31008:alone with his company of eighty-three men every effort of the hostile
tests/les_miserables.txt:31009:army. Pontmercy was one of the three who emerged alive from that
tests/les_miserables.txt:31010:cemetery. He was at Friedland. Then he saw Moscow. Then La Bérésina,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31011:then Lutzen, Bautzen, Dresden, Wachau, Leipzig, and the defiles of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31014:Arnay-Le-Duc, being then a captain, he put ten Cossacks to the sword,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31015:and saved, not his general, but his corporal. He was well slashed up on
tests/les_miserables.txt:31016:this occasion, and twenty-seven splinters were extracted from his left
tests/les_miserables.txt:31017:arm alone. Eight days before the capitulation of Paris he had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:31018:exchanged with a comrade and entered the cavalry. He had what was
tests/les_miserables.txt:31019:called under the old regime, _the double hand_, that is to say, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:31021:squadron or a battalion as an officer. It is from this aptitude,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31022:perfected by a military education, which certain special branches of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31023:the service arise, the dragoons, for example, who are both cavalry-men
tests/les_miserables.txt:31024:and infantry at one and the same time. He accompanied Napoleon to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31025:Island of Elba. At Waterloo, he was chief of a squadron of cuirassiers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31026:in Dubois’ brigade. It was he who captured the standard of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31027:Lunenburg battalion. He came and cast the flag at the Emperor’s feet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31028:He was covered with blood. While tearing down the banner he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31029:received a sword-cut across his face. The Emperor, greatly pleased,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31030:shouted to him: “You are a colonel, you are a baron, you are an officer
tests/les_miserables.txt:31031:of the Legion of Honor!” Pontmercy replied: “Sire, I thank you for my
tests/les_miserables.txt:31033:this Georges Pontmercy? He was this same “brigand of the Loire.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31037:Pontmercy, who had been pulled out of the hollow road of Ohain, as it
tests/les_miserables.txt:31038:will be remembered, had succeeded in joining the army, and had dragged
tests/les_miserables.txt:31039:himself from ambulance to ambulance as far as the cantonments of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31042:The Restoration had placed him on half-pay, then had sent him into
tests/les_miserables.txt:31043:residence, that is to say, under surveillance, at Vernon. King Louis
tests/les_miserables.txt:31044:XVIII., regarding all that which had taken place during the Hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:31045:Days as not having occurred at all, did not recognize his quality as an
tests/les_miserables.txt:31046:officer of the Legion of Honor, nor his grade of colonel, nor his title
tests/les_miserables.txt:31047:of baron. He, on his side, neglected no occasion of signing himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:31048:“Colonel Baron Pontmercy.” He had only an old blue coat, and he never
tests/les_miserables.txt:31049:went out without fastening to it his rosette as an officer of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31051:authorities would prosecute him for “illegal” wearing of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:31052:decoration. When this notice was conveyed to him through an officious
tests/les_miserables.txt:31053:intermediary, Pontmercy retorted with a bitter smile: “I do not know
tests/les_miserables.txt:31054:whether I no longer understand French, or whether you no longer speak
tests/les_miserables.txt:31055:it; but the fact is that I do not understand.” Then he went out for
tests/les_miserables.txt:31056:eight successive days with his rosette. They dared not interfere with
tests/les_miserables.txt:31057:him. Two or three times the Minister of War and the general in command
tests/les_miserables.txt:31059:le Commandant Pontmercy.” _ He sent back the letters with the seals
tests/les_miserables.txt:31062:Bonaparte_. Pontmercy had ended, may we be pardoned the expression, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:31068:One day he encountered the district-attorney in one of the streets of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31070:permitted to wear my scar?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31073:He had nothing save his meagre half-pay as chief of squadron. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31074:hired the smallest house which he could find at Vernon. He lived there
tests/les_miserables.txt:31077:thoroughly indignant at bottom, had given his consent with a sigh,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31078:saying: “The greatest families are forced into it.” In 1815, Madame
tests/les_miserables.txt:31079:Pontmercy, an admirable woman in every sense, by the way, lofty in
tests/les_miserables.txt:31080:sentiment and rare, and worthy of her husband, died, leaving a child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31081:This child had been the colonel’s joy in his solitude; but the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31082:grandfather had imperatively claimed his grandson, declaring that if
tests/les_miserables.txt:31083:the child were not given to him he would disinherit him. The father had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31087:Moreover, he had renounced everything, and neither stirred up mischief
tests/les_miserables.txt:31088:nor conspired. He shared his thoughts between the innocent things which
tests/les_miserables.txt:31089:he was then doing and the great things which he had done. He passed his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31090:time in expecting a pink or in recalling Austerlitz.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31092:M. Gillenormand kept up no relations with his son-in-law. The colonel
tests/les_miserables.txt:31093:was “a bandit” to him. M. Gillenormand never mentioned the colonel,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31094:except when he occasionally made mocking allusions to “his Baronship.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31095:It had been expressly agreed that Pontmercy should never attempt to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:31097:over to him disowned and disinherited. For the Gillenormands, Pontmercy
tests/les_miserables.txt:31098:was a man afflicted with the plague. They intended to bring up the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31099:child in their own way. Perhaps the colonel was wrong to accept these
tests/les_miserables.txt:31100:conditions, but he submitted to them, thinking that he was doing right
tests/les_miserables.txt:31101:and sacrificing no one but himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31103:The inheritance of Father Gillenormand did not amount to much; but the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31104:inheritance of Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder was considerable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31105:This aunt, who had remained unmarried, was very rich on the maternal
tests/les_miserables.txt:31108:his mouth to him about it. Nevertheless, in the society into which his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31111:of the case, and as he naturally took in the ideas and opinions which
tests/les_miserables.txt:31113:slow penetration, he gradually came to think of his father only with
tests/les_miserables.txt:31116:While he was growing up in this fashion, the colonel slipped away every
tests/les_miserables.txt:31117:two or three months, came to Paris on the sly, like a criminal breaking
tests/les_miserables.txt:31118:his ban, and went and posted himself at Saint-Sulpice, at the hour when
tests/les_miserables.txt:31120:aunt should turn round, concealed behind a pillar, motionless, not
tests/les_miserables.txt:31121:daring to breathe, he gazed at his child. The scarred veteran was
tests/les_miserables.txt:31124:From this had arisen his connection with the curé of Vernon, M. l’Abbé
tests/les_miserables.txt:31127:That worthy priest was the brother of a warden of Saint-Sulpice, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:31128:had often observed this man gazing at his child, and the scar on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31129:cheek, and the large tears in his eyes. That man, who had so manly an
tests/les_miserables.txt:31130:air, yet who was weeping like a woman, had struck the warden. That face
tests/les_miserables.txt:31131:had clung to his mind. One day, having gone to Vernon to see his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31132:brother, he had encountered Colonel Pontmercy on the bridge, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31133:recognized the man of Saint-Sulpice. The warden had mentioned the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31134:circumstance to the curé, and both had paid the colonel a visit, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:31135:some pretext or other. This visit led to others. The colonel, who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31137:curé and the warden finally came to know the whole history, and how
tests/les_miserables.txt:31138:Pontmercy was sacrificing his happiness to his child’s future. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:31139:caused the curé to regard him with veneration and tenderness, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31140:colonel, on his side, became fond of the curé. And moreover, when both
tests/les_miserables.txt:31141:are sincere and good, no men so penetrate each other, and so amalgamate
tests/les_miserables.txt:31142:with each other, as an old priest and an old soldier. At bottom, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31143:man is the same. The one has devoted his life to his country here
tests/les_miserables.txt:31144:below, the other to his country on high; that is the only difference.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31146:Twice a year, on the first of January and on St. George’s day, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:31147:wrote duty letters to his father, which were dictated by his aunt, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31148:which one would have pronounced to be copied from some formula; this
tests/les_miserables.txt:31150:with very tender letters which the grandfather thrust into his pocket
tests/les_miserables.txt:31159:Madame de T.’s salon was all that Marius Pontmercy knew of the world.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31160:It was the only opening through which he could get a glimpse of life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31161:This opening was sombre, and more cold than warmth, more night than
tests/les_miserables.txt:31162:day, came to him through this skylight. This child, who had been all
tests/les_miserables.txt:31163:joy and light on entering this strange world, soon became melancholy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31164:and, what is still more contrary to his age, grave. Surrounded by all
tests/les_miserables.txt:31166:amazement. Everything conspired to increase this astonishment in him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31168:Noé, Lévis,—which was pronounced Lévi,—Cambis, pronounced Cambyse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31169:These antique visages and these Biblical names mingled in the child’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:31170:mind with the Old Testament which he was learning by heart, and when
tests/les_miserables.txt:31171:they were all there, seated in a circle around a dying fire, sparely
tests/les_miserables.txt:31174:colors could not be distinguished, dropping, at rare intervals, words
tests/les_miserables.txt:31175:which were both majestic and severe, little Marius stared at them with
tests/les_miserables.txt:31176:frightened eyes, in the conviction that he beheld not women, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:31177:patriarchs and magi, not real beings, but phantoms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31180:this ancient salon, and some gentlemen; the Marquis de Sass****,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31181:private secretary to Madame de Berry, the Vicomte de Val***, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:31183:the Prince de Beauff*******, who, though very young, had a gray head
tests/les_miserables.txt:31184:and a pretty and witty wife, whose very low-necked toilettes of scarlet
tests/les_miserables.txt:31186:d’E******, the man in all France who best understood “proportioned
tests/les_miserables.txt:31187:politeness,” the Comte d’Am*****, the kindly man with the amiable chin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31189:Louvre, called the King’s cabinet, M. de Port-de-Guy, bald, and rather
tests/les_miserables.txt:31191:he had been put in the galleys as refractory and chained with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:31192:octogenarian, the Bishop of Mirepoix, also refractory, but as a priest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31193:while he was so in the capacity of a soldier. This was at Toulon. Their
tests/les_miserables.txt:31194:business was to go at night and gather up on the scaffold the heads and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31196:bore away on their backs these dripping corpses, and their red
tests/les_miserables.txt:31197:galley-slave blouses had a clot of blood at the back of the neck, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:31198:was dry in the morning and wet at night. These tragic tales abounded in
tests/les_miserables.txt:31199:Madame de T.’s salon, and by dint of cursing Marat, they applauded
tests/les_miserables.txt:31200:Trestaillon. Some deputies of the undiscoverable variety played their
tests/les_miserables.txt:31201:whist there; M. Thibord du Chalard, M. Lemarchant de Gomicourt, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31202:celebrated scoffer of the right, M. Cornet-Dincourt. The bailiff de
tests/les_miserables.txt:31203:Ferrette, with his short breeches and his thin legs, sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:31205:Comte d’Artois’ companion in pleasures and unlike Aristotle crouching
tests/les_miserables.txt:31206:under Campaspe, he had made the Guimard crawl on all fours, and in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:31209:his collaborator on _la Foudre_, said: “Bah! Who is there who is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:31211:preacher to the King, the Abbé Frayssinous, who was not, as yet, either
tests/les_miserables.txt:31212:count, or bishop, or minister, or peer, and who wore an old cassock
tests/les_miserables.txt:31214:Saint-Germain-des-Prés; also the Pope’s Nuncio, then Monsignor Macchi,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31215:Archbishop of Nisibi, later on Cardinal, remarkable for his long,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31217:domestic prelate, one of the seven participant prothonotaries of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31218:Holy See, Canon of the illustrious Liberian basilica, Advocate of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31219:saints, _Postulatore dei Santi_, which refers to matters of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31220:canonization, and signifies very nearly: Master of Requests of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31221:section of Paradise. Lastly, two cardinals, M. de la Luzerne, and M. de
tests/les_miserables.txt:31224:_Conservateur_ articles side by side with Chateaubriand; M. de Cl******
tests/les_miserables.txt:31225:T******* was Archbishop of Toul****, and often made trips to Paris, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:31228:displayed his red stockings beneath his tucked-up cassock; his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31229:specialty was a hatred of the Encyclopædia, and his desperate play at
tests/les_miserables.txt:31230:billiards, and persons who, at that epoch, passed through the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:31232:stood, halted to listen to the shock of the balls and the piercing
tests/les_miserables.txt:31233:voice of the Cardinal shouting to his conclavist, Monseigneur Cotiret,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31234:Bishop _in partibus_ of Caryste: “Mark, Abbé, I make a cannon.” The
tests/les_miserables.txt:31238:his assiduity at the Academy; through the glass door of the neighboring
tests/les_miserables.txt:31239:hall of the library where the French Academy then held its meetings,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31240:the curious could, on every Tuesday, contemplate the Ex-Bishop of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31241:Senlis, usually standing erect, freshly powdered, in violet hose, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:31242:his back turned to the door, apparently for the purpose of allowing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31243:better view of his little collar. All these ecclesiastics, though for
tests/les_miserables.txt:31244:the most part as much courtiers as churchmen, added to the gravity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31245:the T. salon, whose seigniorial aspect was accentuated by five peers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31246:France, the Marquis de Vib****, the Marquis de Tal***, the Marquis de
tests/les_miserables.txt:31247:Herb*******, the Vicomte Damb***, and the Duc de Val********. This Duc
tests/les_miserables.txt:31248:de Val********, although Prince de Mon***, that is to say a reigning
tests/les_miserables.txt:31249:prince abroad, had so high an idea of France and its peerage, that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:31251:Cardinals are the peers of France of Rome; the lords are the peers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31252:France of England.” Moreover, as it is indispensable that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31253:Revolution should be everywhere in this century, this feudal salon was,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31257:There lay the essence and quintessence of the Parisian white society.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31259:There is always a trace of anarchy in renown. Chateaubriand, had he
tests/les_miserables.txt:31260:entered there, would have produced the effect of Père Duchêne. Some of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31261:the scoffed-at did, nevertheless, penetrate thither on sufferance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31262:Comte Beug*** was received there, subject to correction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31266:of to-day are demagogues, let us record it to their credit.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31268:At Madame de T.’s the society was superior, taste was exquisite and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31269:haughty, under the cover of a great show of politeness. Manners there
tests/les_miserables.txt:31270:admitted of all sorts of involuntary refinements which were the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:31271:régime itself, buried but still alive. Some of these habits, especially
tests/les_miserables.txt:31272:in the matter of language, seem eccentric. Persons but superficially
tests/les_miserables.txt:31273:acquainted with them would have taken for provincial that which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:31274:only antique. A woman was called _Madame la Générale. Madame la
tests/les_miserables.txt:31275:Colonelle_ was not entirely disused. The charming Madame de Léon, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:31276:memory, no doubt, of the Duchesses de Longueville and de Chevreuse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31277:preferred this appellation to her title of Princesse. The Marquise de
tests/les_miserables.txt:31278:Créquy was also called _Madame la Colonelle_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31280:It was this little high society which invented at the Tuileries the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31287:which released them from the necessity of understanding it. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:31288:abetted each other in amazement. They communicated to each other that
tests/les_miserables.txt:31289:modicum of light which they possessed. Methuselah bestowed information
tests/les_miserables.txt:31290:on Epimenides. The deaf man made the blind man acquainted with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31291:course of things. They declared that the time which had elapsed since
tests/les_miserables.txt:31293:the grace of God, in the five and twentieth year of his reign, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31295:adolescence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31297:All was harmonious; nothing was too much alive; speech hardly amounted
tests/les_miserables.txt:31300:liveries in the antechamber were antiquated. These utterly obsolete
tests/les_miserables.txt:31301:personages were served by domestics of the same stamp.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31304:obstinately resisting the sepulchre. Nearly the whole dictionary
tests/les_miserables.txt:31305:consisted of _Conserver, Conservation, Conservateur; to be in good
tests/les_miserables.txt:31306:odor_,—that was the point. There are, in fact, aromatics in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31308:was a mummified society. The masters were embalmed, the servants were
tests/les_miserables.txt:31312:maid, continued to say: “My people.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31321:To be ultra is to go beyond. It is to attack the sceptre in the name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31323:the thing which one is dragging, it is to kick over the traces; it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:31324:to cavil at the fagot on the score of the amount of cooking received by
tests/les_miserables.txt:31325:heretics; it is to reproach the idol with its small amount of idolatry;
tests/les_miserables.txt:31326:it is to insult through excess of respect; it is to discover that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31327:Pope is not sufficiently papish, that the King is not sufficiently
tests/les_miserables.txt:31328:royal, and that the night has too much light; it is to be discontented
tests/les_miserables.txt:31330:whiteness; it is to be a partisan of things to the point of becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:31333:The ultra spirit especially characterizes the first phase of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31336:Nothing in history resembles that quarter of an hour which begins in
tests/les_miserables.txt:31338:practical man of the Right. These six years were an extraordinary
tests/les_miserables.txt:31340:sombre, illuminated as by the radiance of dawn and entirely covered, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:31341:the same time, with the shadows of the great catastrophes which still
tests/les_miserables.txt:31343:in that light and that shadow, a complete little new and old world,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31344:comic and sad, juvenile and senile, which was rubbing its eyes; nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:31345:resembles an awakening like a return; a group which regarded France
tests/les_miserables.txt:31346:with ill-temper, and which France regarded with irony; good old owls of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31348:“former” subjects of amazement at everything, brave and noble gentlemen
tests/les_miserables.txt:31349:who smiled at being in France but wept also, delighted to behold their
tests/les_miserables.txt:31350:country once more, in despair at not finding their monarchy; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31352:to say, the nobility of the sword, with scorn; historic races who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31353:lost the sense of history; the sons of the companions of Charlemagne
tests/les_miserables.txt:31354:disdaining the companions of Napoleon. The swords, as we have just
tests/les_miserables.txt:31356:nothing but a scrap of rusty iron; the sword of Marengo was odious and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31357:was only a sabre. Former days did not recognize Yesterday. People no
tests/les_miserables.txt:31359:called Bonaparte Scapin. This Society no longer exists. Nothing of it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31360:we repeat, exists to-day. When we select from it some one figure at
tests/les_miserables.txt:31362:strange to us as the world before the Deluge. It is because it, too, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:31363:a matter of fact, has been engulfed in a deluge. It has disappeared
tests/les_miserables.txt:31364:beneath two Revolutions. What billows are ideas! How quickly they cover
tests/les_miserables.txt:31366:they create frightful gulfs!
tests/les_miserables.txt:31368:Such was the physiognomy of the salons of those distant and candid
tests/les_miserables.txt:31371:These salons had a literature and politics of their own. They believed
tests/les_miserables.txt:31372:in Fiévée. M. Agier laid down the law in them. They commentated M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31373:Colnet, the old bookseller and publicist of the Quay Malaquais.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31374:Napoleon was to them thoroughly the Corsican Ogre. Later on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31375:introduction into history of M. le Marquis de Bonaparte,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31376:Lieutenant-General of the King’s armies, was a concession to the spirit
tests/les_miserables.txt:31380:doctrinarians began to spring up in them, a disturbing shade. Their way
tests/les_miserables.txt:31381:was to be Royalists and to excuse themselves for being so. Where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31382:ultras were very proud, the doctrinarians were rather ashamed. They had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31383:wit; they had silence; their political dogma was suitably impregnated
tests/les_miserables.txt:31384:with arrogance; they should have succeeded. They indulged, and usefully
tests/les_miserables.txt:31385:too, in excesses in the matter of white neckties and tightly buttoned
tests/les_miserables.txt:31386:coats. The mistake or the misfortune of the doctrinarian party was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:31387:create aged youth. They assumed the poses of wise men. They dreamed of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31388:engrafting a temperate power on the absolute and excessive principle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31389:They opposed, and sometimes with rare intelligence, conservative
tests/les_miserables.txt:31390:liberalism to the liberalism which demolishes. They were heard to say:
tests/les_miserables.txt:31391:“Thanks for Royalism! It has rendered more than one service. It has
tests/les_miserables.txt:31392:brought back tradition, worship, religion, respect. It is faithful,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31393:brave, chivalric, loving, devoted. It has mingled, though with regret,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31394:the secular grandeurs of the monarchy with the new grandeurs of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31397:mistake which it makes with regard to us,—have we not sometimes been
tests/les_miserables.txt:31399:be intelligent on all points. To attack Royalism is a misconstruction
tests/les_miserables.txt:31400:of liberalism. What an error! And what blindness! Revolutionary France
tests/les_miserables.txt:31401:is wanting in respect towards historic France, that is to say, towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:31403:the nobility of the monarchy is treated as the nobility of the Empire
tests/les_miserables.txt:31406:something to proscribe! Does it serve any purpose to ungild the crown
tests/les_miserables.txt:31407:of Louis XIV., to scrape the coat of arms of Henry IV.? We scoff at M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31408:de Vaublanc for erasing the N’s from the bridge of Jena! What was it
tests/les_miserables.txt:31412:country in the past any more than in the present. Why not accept the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31413:whole of history? Why not love the whole of France?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31416:It is thus that doctrinarians criticised and protected Royalism, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:31417:was displeased at criticism and furious at protection.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31419:The ultras marked the first epoch of Royalism, congregation
tests/les_miserables.txt:31420:characterized the second. Skill follows ardor. Let us confine ourselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:31421:here to this sketch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31423:In the course of this narrative, the author of this book has
tests/les_miserables.txt:31424:encountered in his path this curious moment of contemporary history; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:31425:has been forced to cast a passing glance upon it, and to trace once
tests/les_miserables.txt:31426:more some of the singular features of this society which is unknown
tests/les_miserables.txt:31428:Souvenirs both respectful and affectionate, for they touch his mother,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31429:attach him to this past. Moreover, let us remark, this same petty world
tests/les_miserables.txt:31430:had a grandeur of its own. One may smile at it, but one can neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:31431:despise nor hate it. It was the France of former days.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31433:Marius Pontmercy pursued some studies, as all children do. When he
tests/les_miserables.txt:31434:emerged from the hands of Aunt Gillenormand, his grandfather confided
tests/les_miserables.txt:31435:him to a worthy professor of the most purely classic innocence. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:31436:young soul which was expanding passed from a prude to a vulgar pedant.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31438:Marius went through his years of college, then he entered the law
tests/les_miserables.txt:31439:school. He was a Royalist, fanatical and severe. He did not love his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31440:grandfather much, as the latter’s gayety and cynicism repelled him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31443:He was, on the whole, a cold and ardent, noble, generous, proud,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31444:religious, enthusiastic lad; dignified to harshness, pure to shyness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31452:The conclusion of Marius’ classical studies coincided with M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31453:Gillenormand’s departure from society. The old man bade farewell to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31456:There he had for servants, in addition to the porter, that chambermaid,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31457:Nicolette, who had succeeded to Magnon, and that short-breathed and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31473:except this—that he should one day be called upon to see his father.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31474:Nothing could be more unexpected, more surprising, and, let us admit
tests/les_miserables.txt:31475:it, more disagreeable to him. It was forcing estrangement into
tests/les_miserables.txt:31476:reconciliation. It was not an affliction, but it was an unpleasant
tests/les_miserables.txt:31479:Marius, in addition to his motives of political antipathy, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:31480:convinced that his father, _the slasher_, as M. Gillenormand called him
tests/les_miserables.txt:31481:on his amiable days, did not love him; this was evident, since he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31488:“It appears that he is ill. He demands your presence.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31493:“Set out to-morrow morning. I think there is a coach which leaves the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31494:Cour des Fontaines at six o’clock, and which arrives in the evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31498:Then he crushed the letter in his hand and thrust it into his pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31500:father on the following morning. A diligence from the Rue du Bouloi
tests/les_miserables.txt:31505:The next day, at twilight, Marius reached Vernon. People were just
tests/les_miserables.txt:31506:beginning to light their candles. He asked the first person whom he met
tests/les_miserables.txt:31507:for “M. Pontmercy’s house.” For in his own mind, he agreed with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31508:Restoration, and like it, did not recognize his father’s claim to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31509:title of either colonel or baron.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31514:“M. Pontmercy?” said Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31527:“But I am his son!” persisted Marius. “He is expecting me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31530:“He no longer expects you,” said the woman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31532:Then he perceived that she was weeping.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31536:In that room, which was lighted by a tallow candle standing on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31537:chimney-piece, there were three men, one standing erect, another
tests/les_miserables.txt:31539:one on the floor was the colonel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31541:The other two were the doctor, and the priest, who was engaged in
tests/les_miserables.txt:31544:The colonel had been attacked by brain fever three days previously. As
tests/les_miserables.txt:31547:worse. On the very evening of Marius’ arrival at Vernon, the colonel
tests/les_miserables.txt:31548:had had an attack of delirium; he had risen from his bed, in spite of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31549:the servant’s efforts to prevent him, crying: “My son is not coming! I
tests/les_miserables.txt:31551:on the floor of the antechamber. He had just expired.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31553:The doctor had been summoned, and the curé. The doctor had arrived too
tests/les_miserables.txt:31556:By the dim light of the candle, a large tear could be distinguished on
tests/les_miserables.txt:31557:the pale and prostrate colonel’s cheek, where it had trickled from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31562:venerable and manly face, on those open eyes which saw not, on those
tests/les_miserables.txt:31563:white locks, those robust limbs, on which, here and there, brown lines,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31564:marking sword-thrusts, and a sort of red stars, which indicated
tests/les_miserables.txt:31565:bullet-holes, were visible. He contemplated that gigantic sear which
tests/les_miserables.txt:31566:stamped heroism on that countenance upon which God had imprinted
tests/les_miserables.txt:31567:goodness. He reflected that this man was his father, and that this man
tests/les_miserables.txt:31568:was dead, and a chill ran over him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31570:The sorrow which he felt was the sorrow which he would have felt in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31571:presence of any other man whom he had chanced to behold stretched out
tests/les_miserables.txt:31574:Anguish, poignant anguish, was in that chamber. The servant-woman was
tests/les_miserables.txt:31575:lamenting in a corner, the curé was praying, and his sobs were audible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31576:the doctor was wiping his eyes; the corpse itself was weeping.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31578:The doctor, the priest, and the woman gazed at Marius in the midst of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31579:their affliction without uttering a word; he was the stranger there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31580:Marius, who was far too little affected, felt ashamed and embarrassed
tests/les_miserables.txt:31582:the floor, in order to produce the impression that grief had deprived
tests/les_miserables.txt:31585:At the same time, he experienced remorse, and he despised himself for
tests/les_miserables.txt:31589:The colonel had left nothing. The sale of big furniture barely paid the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31592:The servant found a scrap of paper, which she handed to Marius. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:31593:contained the following, in the colonel’s handwriting:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:31596:Waterloo. Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I
tests/les_miserables.txt:31597:purchased with my blood, my son shall take it and bear it. That he will
tests/les_miserables.txt:31598:be worthy of it is a matter of course.” Below, the colonel had added:
tests/les_miserables.txt:31600:name was Thénardier. I think that he has recently been keeping a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:31602:Montfermeil. If my son meets him, he will do all the good he can to
tests/les_miserables.txt:31607:but because of that vague respect for death which is always imperious
tests/les_miserables.txt:31610:Nothing remained of the colonel. M. Gillenormand had his sword and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31611:uniform sold to an old-clothes dealer. The neighbors devastated the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31618:In two days the colonel was buried, and in three forgotten.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31620:Marius wore crape on his hat. That was all.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31629:Marius had preserved the religious habits of his childhood. One Sunday,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31630:when he went to hear mass at Saint-Sulpice, at that same chapel of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31631:Virgin whither his aunt had led him when a small lad, he placed himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:31633:that occasion, and knelt down, without paying any special heed, upon a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31634:chair of Utrecht velvet, on the back of which was inscribed this name:
tests/les_miserables.txt:31638:“This is my place, sir.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31642:chair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31644:The mass concluded, Marius still stood thoughtfully a few paces
tests/les_miserables.txt:31645:distant; the old man approached him again and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:31655:me. You see, I am attached to this place. It seems to me that the mass
tests/les_miserables.txt:31656:is better from here. Why? I will tell you. It is from this place, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:31657:I have watched a poor, brave father come regularly, every two or three
tests/les_miserables.txt:31658:months, for the last ten years, since he had no other opportunity and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31659:no other way of seeing his child, because he was prevented by family
tests/les_miserables.txt:31660:arrangements. He came at the hour when he knew that his son would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:31661:brought to mass. The little one never suspected that his father was
tests/les_miserables.txt:31663:innocent! The father kept behind a pillar, so that he might not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:31664:seen. He gazed at his child and he wept. He adored that little fellow,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31665:poor man! I could see that. This spot has become sanctified in my
tests/les_miserables.txt:31666:sight, and I have contracted a habit of coming hither to listen to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31667:mass. I prefer it to the stall to which I have a right, in my capacity
tests/les_miserables.txt:31669:father-in-law, a wealthy aunt, relatives, I don’t know exactly what
tests/les_miserables.txt:31670:all, who threatened to disinherit the child if he, the father, saw him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31671:He sacrificed himself in order that his son might be rich and happy
tests/les_miserables.txt:31672:some day. He was separated from him because of political opinions.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31673:Certainly, I approve of political opinions, but there are people who do
tests/les_miserables.txt:31674:not know where to stop. Mon Dieu! a man is not a monster because he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:31675:at Waterloo; a father is not separated from his child for such a reason
tests/les_miserables.txt:31676:as that. He was one of Bonaparte’s colonels. He is dead, I believe. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:31677:lived at Vernon, where I have a brother who is a curé, and his name was
tests/les_miserables.txt:31678:something like Pontmarie or Montpercy. He had a fine sword-cut, on my
tests/les_miserables.txt:31682:“Pontmercy,” suggested Marius, turning pale.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31684:“Precisely, Pontmercy. Did you know him?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31690:The old warden clasped his hands and exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:31692:“Ah! you are the child! Yes, that’s true, he must be a man by this
tests/les_miserables.txt:31693:time. Well! poor child, you may say that you had a father who loved you
tests/les_miserables.txt:31697:Marius offered his arm to the old man and conducted him to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31719:Where it was that Marius went will be disclosed a little further on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31722:straight to the library of the law-school and asked for the files of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31725:He read the _Moniteur_, he read all the histories of the Republic and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31727:newspapers, the bulletins, the proclamations; he devoured everything.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31728:The first time that he came across his father’s name in the bulletins
tests/les_miserables.txt:31730:generals under whom Georges Pontmercy had served, among others, Comte
tests/les_miserables.txt:31731:H. Church-warden Mabeuf, whom he went to see again, told him about the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31732:life at Vernon, the colonel’s retreat, his flowers, his solitude.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31733:Marius came to a full knowledge of that rare, sweet, and sublime man,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31734:that species of lion-lamb who had been his father.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31736:In the meanwhile, occupied as he was with this study which absorbed all
tests/les_miserables.txt:31738:all. He made his appearance at meals; then they searched for him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31741:deuce! I thought it was only an affair of gallantry. It seems that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:31745:It was a passion, in fact. Marius was on the high road to adoring his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31748:At the same time, his ideas underwent an extraordinary change. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:31749:phases of this change were numerous and successive. As this is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31751:follow these phases step by step and to indicate them all.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31753:That history upon which he had just cast his eyes appalled him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31755:The first effect was to dazzle him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31757:Up to that time, the Republic, the Empire, had been to him only
tests/les_miserables.txt:31758:monstrous words. The Republic, a guillotine in the twilight; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31760:he had expected to find only a chaos of shadows, he had beheld, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31761:sort of unprecedented surprise, mingled with fear and joy, stars
tests/les_miserables.txt:31764:stood. He recoiled, blinded by the brilliant lights. Little by little,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31765:when his astonishment had passed off, he grew accustomed to this
tests/les_miserables.txt:31766:radiance, he contemplated these deeds without dizziness, he examined
tests/les_miserables.txt:31768:presented themselves luminously, in perspective, before his mind’s eye;
tests/les_miserables.txt:31769:he beheld each of these groups of events and of men summed up in two
tests/les_miserables.txt:31770:tremendous facts: the Republic in the sovereignty of civil right
tests/les_miserables.txt:31771:restored to the masses, the Empire in the sovereignty of the French
tests/les_miserables.txt:31773:from the Revolution, and the grand figure of France spring forth from
tests/les_miserables.txt:31774:the Empire. He asserted in his conscience, that all this had been good.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31775:What his dazzled state neglected in this, his first far too synthetic
tests/les_miserables.txt:31776:estimation, we do not think it necessary to point out here. It is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31777:state of a mind on the march that we are recording. Progress is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:31778:accomplished in one stage. That stated, once for all, in connection
tests/les_miserables.txt:31779:with what precedes as well as with what is to follow, we continue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31781:He then perceived that, up to that moment, he had comprehended his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31782:country no more than he had comprehended his father. He had not known
tests/les_miserables.txt:31783:either the one or the other, and a sort of voluntary night had obscured
tests/les_miserables.txt:31787:He was filled with regret and remorse, and he reflected in despair that
tests/les_miserables.txt:31788:all he had in his soul could now be said only to the tomb. Oh! if his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31789:father had still been in existence, if he had still had him, if God, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:31790:his compassion and his goodness, had permitted his father to be still
tests/les_miserables.txt:31791:among the living, how he would have run, how he would have precipitated
tests/les_miserables.txt:31792:himself, how he would have cried to his father: “Father! Here I am! It
tests/les_miserables.txt:31794:embraced that white head, bathed his hair in tears, gazed upon his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31795:scar, pressed his hands, adored his garment, kissed his feet! Oh! Why
tests/les_miserables.txt:31796:had his father died so early, before his time, before the justice, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31797:love of his son had come to him? Marius had a continual sob in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31798:heart, which said to him every moment: “Alas!” At the same time, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:31799:became more truly serious, more truly grave, more sure of his thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:31800:and his faith. At each instant, gleams of the true came to complete his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31802:conscious of a sort of natural enlargement, which gave him two things
tests/les_miserables.txt:31803:that were new to him—his father and his country.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31806:which he had hated, he penetrated that which he had abhorred;
tests/les_miserables.txt:31807:henceforth he plainly perceived the providential, divine and human
tests/les_miserables.txt:31808:sense of the great things which he had been taught to detest, and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31809:the great men whom he had been instructed to curse. When he reflected
tests/les_miserables.txt:31810:on his former opinions, which were but those of yesterday, and which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31811:nevertheless, seemed to him already so very ancient, he grew indignant,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31817:But the latter, we will confess, was not effected without labor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31819:From his infancy, he had been imbued with the judgments of the party of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31820:1814, on Bonaparte. Now, all the prejudices of the Restoration, all its
tests/les_miserables.txt:31821:interests, all its instincts tended to disfigure Napoleon. It execrated
tests/les_miserables.txt:31822:him even more than it did Robespierre. It had very cleverly turned to
tests/les_miserables.txt:31823:sufficiently good account the fatigue of the nation, and the hatred of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31824:mothers. Bonaparte had become an almost fabulous monster, and in order
tests/les_miserables.txt:31825:to paint him to the imagination of the people, which, as we lately
tests/les_miserables.txt:31826:pointed out, resembles the imagination of children, the party of 1814
tests/les_miserables.txt:31827:made him appear under all sorts of terrifying masks in succession, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:31828:that which is terrible though it remains grandiose to that which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:31829:terrible and becomes grotesque, from Tiberius to the bugaboo. Thus, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:31832:entertained—about _that man_, as he was called—any other ideas in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31833:mind. They had combined with the tenacity which existed in his nature.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31836:On reading history, on studying him, especially in the documents and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31837:materials for history, the veil which concealed Napoleon from the eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:31838:of Marius was gradually rent. He caught a glimpse of something immense,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31839:and he suspected that he had been deceived up to that moment, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31840:score of Bonaparte as about all the rest; each day he saw more
tests/les_miserables.txt:31841:distinctly; and he set about mounting, slowly, step by step, almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:31842:regretfully in the beginning, then with intoxication and as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:31843:attracted by an irresistible fascination, first the sombre steps, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:31847:One night, he was alone in his little chamber near the roof. His candle
tests/les_miserables.txt:31848:was burning; he was reading, with his elbows resting on his table close
tests/les_miserables.txt:31849:to the open window. All sorts of reveries reached him from space, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31850:mingled with his thoughts. What a spectacle is the night! One hears
tests/les_miserables.txt:31851:dull sounds, without knowing whence they proceed; one beholds Jupiter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31852:which is twelve hundred times larger than the earth, glowing like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31853:firebrand, the azure is black, the stars shine; it is formidable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31855:He was perusing the bulletins of the grand army, those heroic strophes
tests/les_miserables.txt:31859:within him; it seemed to him at moments that his father passed close to
tests/les_miserables.txt:31861:singular state; he thought that he heard drums, cannon, trumpets, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31863:cavalry; from time to time, his eyes were raised heavenward, and gazed
tests/les_miserables.txt:31864:upon the colossal constellations as they gleamed in the measureless
tests/les_miserables.txt:31865:depths of space, then they fell upon his book once more, and there they
tests/les_miserables.txt:31866:beheld other colossal things moving confusedly. His heart contracted
tests/les_miserables.txt:31867:within him. He was in a transport, trembling, panting. All at once,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31869:obeying, he sprang to his feet, stretched both arms out of the window,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31870:gazed intently into the gloom, the silence, the infinite darkness, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31871:eternal immensity, and exclaimed: “Long live the Emperor!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:31874:From that moment forth, all was over; the Ogre of Corsica,—the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31876:sisters,—the actor who took lessons of Talma,—the poisoner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31877:Jaffa,—the tiger,—Buonaparte,—all this vanished, and gave place in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31878:mind to a vague and brilliant radiance in which shone, at an
tests/les_miserables.txt:31879:inaccessible height, the pale marble phantom of Cæsar. The Emperor had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31880:been for his father only the well-beloved captain whom one admires, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:31881:whom one sacrifices one’s self; he was something more to Marius. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:31882:the predestined constructor of the French group, succeeding the Roman
tests/les_miserables.txt:31883:group in the domination of the universe. He was a prodigious architect,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31884:of a destruction, the continuer of Charlemagne, of Louis XI., of Henry
tests/les_miserables.txt:31885:IV., of Richelieu, of Louis XIV., and of the Committee of Public
tests/les_miserables.txt:31886:Safety, having his spots, no doubt, his faults, his crimes even, being
tests/les_miserables.txt:31888:spots, powerful in his crime.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31890:He was the predestined man, who had forced all nations to say: “The
tests/les_miserables.txt:31891:great nation!” He was better than that, he was the very incarnation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:31892:France, conquering Europe by the sword which he grasped, and the world
tests/les_miserables.txt:31893:by the light which he shed. Marius saw in Bonaparte the dazzling
tests/les_miserables.txt:31894:spectre which will always rise upon the frontier, and which will guard
tests/les_miserables.txt:31895:the future. Despot but dictator; a despot resulting from a republic and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31896:summing up a revolution. Napoleon became for him the man-people as
tests/les_miserables.txt:31899:It will be perceived, that like all new converts to a religion, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31900:conversion intoxicated him, he hurled himself headlong into adhesion
tests/les_miserables.txt:31901:and he went too far. His nature was so constructed; once on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31903:Fanaticism for the sword took possession of him, and complicated in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31904:mind his enthusiasm for the idea. He did not perceive that, along with
tests/les_miserables.txt:31905:genius, and pell-mell, he was admitting force, that is to say, that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:31906:was installing in two compartments of his idolatry, on the one hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:31907:that which is divine, on the other that which is brutal. In many
tests/les_miserables.txt:31908:respects, he had set about deceiving himself otherwise. He admitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:31909:everything. There is a way of encountering error while on one’s way to
tests/les_miserables.txt:31910:the truth. He had a violent sort of good faith which took everything in
tests/les_miserables.txt:31911:the lump. In the new path which he had entered on, in judging the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31913:neglected the attenuating circumstances.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31916:beheld the fall of the monarchy, he now saw the advent of France. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:31917:orientation had changed. What had been his East became the West. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31920:All these revolutions were accomplished within him, without his family
tests/les_miserables.txt:31921:obtaining an inkling of the case.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31924:Bourbon and ultra skin, when he had cast off the aristocrat, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:31925:Jacobite and the Royalist, when he had become thoroughly a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31926:revolutionist, profoundly democratic and republican, he went to an
tests/les_miserables.txt:31927:engraver on the Quai des Orfévres and ordered a hundred cards bearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:31928:this name: _Le Baron Marius Pontmercy_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31930:This was only the strictly logical consequence of the change which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:31931:taken place in him, a change in which everything gravitated round his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31934:Only, as he did not know any one and could not sow his cards with any
tests/les_miserables.txt:31935:porter, he put them in his pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31937:By another natural consequence, in proportion as he drew nearer to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31938:father, to the latter’s memory, and to the things for which the colonel
tests/les_miserables.txt:31939:had fought five and twenty years before, he receded from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31941:not please him. There already existed between them all the dissonances
tests/les_miserables.txt:31943:shocks and exasperates the melancholy of Werther. So long as the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:31944:political opinions and the same ideas had been common to them both,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31947:experienced unutterable impulses to revolt, when he reflected that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:31949:from the colonel, thus depriving the father of the child, and the child
tests/les_miserables.txt:31956:already said. Only he grew colder and colder; laconic at meals, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:31957:rare in the house. When his aunt scolded him for it, he was very gentle
tests/les_miserables.txt:31958:and alleged his studies, his lectures, the examinations, etc., as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31967:On one of these trips, which were always very brief, he went to
tests/les_miserables.txt:31968:Montfermeil, in order to obey the injunction which his father had left
tests/les_miserables.txt:31970:Thénardier. Thénardier had failed, the inn was closed, and no one knew
tests/les_miserables.txt:31971:what had become of him. Marius was away from the house for four days on
tests/les_miserables.txt:31974:“He is getting decidedly wild,” said his grandfather.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31976:They thought they had noticed that he wore something on his breast,
tests/les_miserables.txt:31977:under his shirt, which was attached to his neck by a black ribbon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31985:We have mentioned a lancer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31988:who led a garrison life, outside the family and far from the domestic
tests/les_miserables.txt:31989:hearth. Lieutenant Théodule Gillenormand fulfilled all the conditions
tests/les_miserables.txt:31990:required to make what is called a fine officer. He had “a lady’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:31991:waist,” a victorious manner of trailing his sword and of twirling his
tests/les_miserables.txt:31992:moustache in a hook. He visited Paris very rarely, and so rarely that
tests/les_miserables.txt:31993:Marius had never seen him. The cousins knew each other only by name. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:31995:who preferred him because she did not see him. Not seeing people
tests/les_miserables.txt:31996:permits one to attribute to them all possible perfections.
tests/les_miserables.txt:31999:apartment as much disturbed as her placidity was capable of allowing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32004:the night out again.” Mademoiselle Gillenormand had ascended to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:32005:chamber greatly puzzled, and on the staircase had dropped this
tests/les_miserables.txt:32006:exclamation: “This is too much!”—and this interrogation: “But where is
tests/les_miserables.txt:32008:illicit, a woman in the shadow, a rendezvous, a mystery, and she would
tests/les_miserables.txt:32009:not have been sorry to thrust her spectacles into the affair. Tasting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32010:mystery resembles getting the first flavor of a scandal; sainted souls
tests/les_miserables.txt:32011:do not detest this. There is some curiosity about scandal in the secret
tests/les_miserables.txt:32012:compartments of bigotry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32016:In order to get rid of this curiosity which agitated her a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:32018:scalloping, with one layer of cotton after another, one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:32019:embroideries of the Empire and the Restoration, in which there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:32020:numerous cart-wheels. The work was clumsy, the worker cross. She had
tests/les_miserables.txt:32023:before her, making the regulation salute. She uttered a cry of delight.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32025:aunt, but it is always agreeable to see a lancer enter one’s chamber.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32027:“You here, Théodule!” she exclaimed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32032:“Embrace me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32049:“Mathematically!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32052:“Remain, my little Théodule, I beseech you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32056:They are changing our garrison; we have been at Melun, we are being
tests/les_miserables.txt:32057:transferred to Gaillon. It is necessary to pass through Paris in order
tests/les_miserables.txt:32070:Théodule kissed her again, and she experienced the joy of having some
tests/les_miserables.txt:32071:of the skin scratched from her neck by the braidings on his uniform.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32073:“Are you making the journey on horseback, with your regiment?” she
tests/les_miserables.txt:32076:“No, aunt. I wanted to see you. I have special permission. My servant
tests/les_miserables.txt:32077:is taking my horse; I am travelling by diligence. And, by the way, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:32084:“Is my cousin Marius Pontmercy travelling so, too?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32087:“How do you know that?” said his aunt, suddenly pricked to the quick
tests/les_miserables.txt:32088:with a lively curiosity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32090:“On my arrival, I went to the diligence to engage my seat in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32091:coupé.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32097:“A traveller had already come to engage a seat in the imperial. I saw
tests/les_miserables.txt:32098:his name on the card.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32104:“Marius Pontmercy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32107:“The wicked fellow!” exclaimed his aunt. “Ah! your cousin is not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32109:diligence!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32115:“But you—it is your duty; in his case, it is wildness.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32120:Here an event occurred to Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder,—an idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:32121:struck her. If she had been a man, she would have slapped her brow. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:32124:“Are you aware whether your cousin knows you?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32127:“No. I have seen him; but he has never deigned to notice me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32133:“He in the imperial, I in the coupé.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32136:“Where does this diligence run?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32146:in order to take the branch coach for Gaillon. I know nothing of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32151:While you, at least, are called Théodule.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32154:“I would rather be called Alfred,” said the officer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32195:Théodule replied with the composure of a man of bronze:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:32197:“Some petticoat or other.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32200:And with that inward laugh which denotes certainty, he added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:32205:“That is evident,” exclaimed his aunt, who thought she heard M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32206:Gillenormand speaking, and who felt her conviction become irresistible
tests/les_miserables.txt:32207:at that word _fillette_, accentuated in almost the very same fashion by
tests/les_miserables.txt:32208:the granduncle and the grandnephew. She resumed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:32211:be easy. Since a lass there is, try to get a sight of her. You must
tests/les_miserables.txt:32215:Théodule had no excessive taste for this sort of spying; but he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32216:much touched by the ten louis, and he thought he saw a chance for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32217:possible sequel. He accepted the commission and said: “As you please,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32224:Mademoiselle Gillenormand embraced him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32226:“You are not the man to play such pranks, Théodule. You obey
tests/les_miserables.txt:32227:discipline, you are the slave of orders, you are a man of scruples and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32228:duty, and you would not quit your family to go and see a creature.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32231:The lancer made the pleased grimace of Cartouche when praised for his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32234:Marius, on the evening following this dialogue, mounted the diligence
tests/les_miserables.txt:32235:without suspecting that he was watched. As for the watcher, the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:32236:thing he did was to fall asleep. His slumber was complete and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32237:conscientious. Argus snored all night long.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32239:At daybreak, the conductor of the diligence shouted: “Vernon! relay of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32245:Then, as his memory cleared by degrees, the effect of waking, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:32246:recalled his aunt, the ten louis, and the account which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:32247:undertaken to render of the deeds and proceedings of Marius. This set
tests/les_miserables.txt:32250:“Perhaps he is no longer in the coach,” he thought, as he rebuttoned
tests/les_miserables.txt:32251:the waistcoat of his undress uniform. “He may have stopped at Poissy;
tests/les_miserables.txt:32254:not go on as far as Pacy, with the choice of turning to the left at
tests/les_miserables.txt:32255:Évreus, or to the right at Laroche-Guyon. Run after him, aunty. What
tests/les_miserables.txt:32259:At that moment a pair of black trousers descending from the imperial,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32260:made its appearance at the window of the coupé.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32267:at the end of the vehicle, was offering flowers to the travellers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32268:“Give your ladies flowers!” she cried.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32270:Marius approached her and purchased the finest flowers in her flat
tests/les_miserables.txt:32273:“Come now,” said Théodule, leaping down from the coupé, “this piques my
tests/les_miserables.txt:32274:curiosity. Who the deuce is he going to carry those flowers to? She
tests/les_miserables.txt:32279:And no longer in pursuance of orders, but from personal curiosity, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:32280:dogs who hunt on their own account, he set out to follow Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32282:Marius paid no attention to Théodule. Elegant women descended from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32283:diligence; he did not glance at them. He seemed to see nothing around
tests/les_miserables.txt:32288:Marius directed his steps towards the church.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32291:mass are the best sort. Nothing is so exquisite as an ogle which passes
tests/les_miserables.txt:32295:On arriving at the church, Marius did not enter it, but skirted the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32302:And he advanced on the tips of his boots towards the corner which
tests/les_miserables.txt:32307:Marius, with his forehead clasped in his hands, was kneeling upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32309:the grave, on a little swelling which marked the head, there stood a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32310:cross of black wood with this name in white letters: COLONEL BARON
tests/les_miserables.txt:32321:It was hither that Marius had come on the first occasion of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32322:absenting himself from Paris. It was hither that he had come every time
tests/les_miserables.txt:32326:Lieutenant Théodule was absolutely put out of countenance by this
tests/les_miserables.txt:32327:unexpected encounter with a sepulchre; he experienced a singular and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32328:disagreeable sensation which he was incapable of analyzing, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:32329:was composed of respect for the tomb, mingled with respect for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32330:colonel. He retreated, leaving Marius alone in the cemetery, and there
tests/les_miserables.txt:32331:was discipline in this retreat. Death appeared to him with large
tests/les_miserables.txt:32333:what to write to his aunt, he decided not to write at all; and it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:32334:probable that nothing would have resulted from the discovery made by
tests/les_miserables.txt:32336:mysterious arrangements which are so frequent in chance, the scene at
tests/les_miserables.txt:32337:Vernon had not had an almost immediate counter-shock at Paris.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32340:morning, descended at his grandfather’s door, and, wearied by the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:32341:nights spent in the diligence, and feeling the need of repairing his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32342:loss of sleep by an hour at the swimming-school, he mounted rapidly to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32343:his chamber, took merely time enough to throw off his travelling-coat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32344:and the black ribbon which he wore round his neck, and went off to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32348:had heard his entrance, and had made haste to climb, as quickly as his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32350:in order to embrace him, and to question him while so doing, and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32353:But the youth had taken less time to descend than the old man had to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32354:ascend, and when Father Gillenormand entered the attic, Marius was no
tests/les_miserables.txt:32358:defiantly the great-coat and the black ribbon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32362:And a moment later, he made his entrance into the salon, where
tests/les_miserables.txt:32364:cart-wheels.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32366:The entrance was a triumphant one.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32368:M. Gillenormand held in one hand the great-coat, and in the other the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32369:neck-ribbon, and exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:32371:“Victory! We are about to penetrate the mystery! We are going to learn
tests/les_miserables.txt:32373:debaucheries of our sly friend! Here we have the romance itself. I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:32377:In fact, a case of black shagreen, resembling a medallion portrait, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32380:The old man took this case and gazed at it for some time without
tests/les_miserables.txt:32381:opening it, with that air of enjoyment, rapture, and wrath, with which
tests/les_miserables.txt:32382:a poor hungry fellow beholds an admirable dinner which is not for him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32385:“For this evidently is a portrait. I know all about such things. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:32387:fright that will make us shudder, probably! Young men have such bad
tests/les_miserables.txt:32393:The case opened by the pressure of a spring. They found in it nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:32394:but a carefully folded paper.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32402:And she put on her spectacles. They unfolded the paper and read as
tests/les_miserables.txt:32406:Waterloo. Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I
tests/les_miserables.txt:32407:purchased with my blood, my son shall take it and bear it. That he will
tests/les_miserables.txt:32408:be worthy of it is a matter of course.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32411:The feelings of father and daughter cannot be described. They felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:32412:chilled as by the breath of a death’s-head. They did not exchange a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32415:Only, M. Gillenormand said in a low voice and as though speaking to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32421:The aunt examined the paper, turned it about in all directions, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:32422:put it back in its case.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32424:At the same moment a little oblong packet, enveloped in blue paper,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32425:fell from one of the pockets of the great-coat. Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:32426:Gillenormand picked it up and unfolded the blue paper.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32428:It contained Marius’ hundred cards. She handed one of them to M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32429:Gillenormand, who read: _Le Baron Marius Pontmercy_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32431:The old man rang the bell. Nicolette came. M. Gillenormand took the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32432:ribbon, the case, and the coat, flung them all on the floor in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32438:A full hour passed in the most profound silence. The old man and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32439:old spinster had seated themselves with their backs to each other, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32440:were thinking, each on his own account, the same things, in all
tests/les_miserables.txt:32447:A few moments later, Marius made his appearance. He entered. Even
tests/les_miserables.txt:32448:before he had crossed the threshold, he saw his grandfather holding one
tests/les_miserables.txt:32449:of his own cards in his hand, and on catching sight of him, the latter
tests/les_miserables.txt:32450:exclaimed with his air of bourgeois and grinning superiority which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32451:something crushing:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:32454:compliments. What is the meaning of this?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32462:M. Gillenormand ceased to laugh, and said harshly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:32467:“My father,” retorted Marius, with downcast eyes and a severe air, “was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32468:a humble and heroic man, who served the Republic and France gloriously,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32470:lived in the bivouac for a quarter of a century, beneath grape-shot and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32471:bullets, in snow and mud by day, beneath rain at night, who captured
tests/les_miserables.txt:32472:two flags, who received twenty wounds, who died forgotten and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32473:abandoned, and who never committed but one mistake, which was to love
tests/les_miserables.txt:32474:too fondly two ingrates, his country and myself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32477:This was more than M. Gillenormand could bear to hear. At the word
tests/les_miserables.txt:32478:_republic_, he rose, or, to speak more correctly, he sprang to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32479:feet. Every word that Marius had just uttered produced on the visage of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32480:the old Royalist the effect of the puffs of air from a forge upon a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32482:from purple, flame-colored.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32484:“Marius!” he cried. “Abominable child! I do not know what your father
tests/les_miserables.txt:32487:scoundrels among those men! They were all rascals, assassins, red-caps,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32490:were all bandits in the service of Robespierre! All who served
tests/les_miserables.txt:32492:betrayed, betrayed their legitimate king! All cowards who fled before
tests/les_miserables.txt:32494:Whether Monsieur your father comes in that category, I do not know! I
tests/les_miserables.txt:32495:am sorry for it, so much the worse, your humble servant!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32501:beholds all his sacred wafers cast to the winds, the fakir who beholds
tests/les_miserables.txt:32502:a passer-by spit upon his idol. It could not be that such things had
tests/les_miserables.txt:32503:been uttered in his presence. What was he to do? His father had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:32504:been trampled under foot and stamped upon in his presence, but by whom?
tests/les_miserables.txt:32508:hand was a sacred grave, on the other hoary locks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32510:He stood there for several moments, staggering as though intoxicated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32512:eyes, gazed fixedly at his grandfather, and cried in a voice of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32521:The old man, who had been crimson, turned whiter than his hair. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:32522:wheeled round towards a bust of M. le Duc de Berry, which stood on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32523:chimney-piece, and made a profound bow, with a sort of peculiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:32524:majesty. Then he paced twice, slowly and in silence, from the fireplace
tests/les_miserables.txt:32525:to the window and from the window to the fireplace, traversing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32526:whole length of the room, and making the polished floor creak as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:32529:On his second turn, he bent over his daughter, who was watching this
tests/les_miserables.txt:32530:encounter with the stupefied air of an antiquated lamb, and said to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:32531:with a smile that was almost calm: “A baron like this gentleman, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32532:bourgeois like myself cannot remain under the same roof.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32535:And drawing himself up, all at once, pallid, trembling, terrible, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:32536:his brow rendered more lofty by the terrible radiance of wrath, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:32551:what to do with it, he continued to address his daughter as _you_
tests/les_miserables.txt:32555:circumstance which, it must be admitted, aggravated his exasperation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32556:There are always petty fatalities of the sort which complicate domestic
tests/les_miserables.txt:32557:dramas. They augment the grievances in such cases, although, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:32558:reality, the wrongs are not increased by them. While carrying Marius’
tests/les_miserables.txt:32559:“duds” precipitately to his chamber, at his grandfather’s command,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32560:Nicolette had, inadvertently, let fall, probably, on the attic
tests/les_miserables.txt:32561:staircase, which was dark, that medallion of black shagreen which
tests/les_miserables.txt:32562:contained the paper penned by the colonel. Neither paper nor case could
tests/les_miserables.txt:32563:afterwards be found. Marius was convinced that “Monsieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:32566:lines which the colonel had written, and, consequently, nothing was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32567:lost. But the paper, the writing, that sacred relic,—all that was his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32571:without knowing where, with thirty francs, his watch, and a few clothes
tests/les_miserables.txt:32572:in a hand-bag. He had entered a hackney-coach, had engaged it by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32573:hour, and had directed his course at hap-hazard towards the Latin
tests/les_miserables.txt:32576:What was to become of Marius?
tests/les_miserables.txt:32589:At that epoch, which was, to all appearances indifferent, a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:32590:revolutionary quiver was vaguely current. Breaths which had started
tests/les_miserables.txt:32593:undergoing a transformation, almost without being conscious of it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32594:through the movement of the age. The needle which moves round the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32595:compass also moves in souls. Each person was taking that step in
tests/les_miserables.txt:32596:advance which he was bound to take. The Royalists were becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:32597:liberals, liberals were turning democrats. It was a flood tide
tests/les_miserables.txt:32598:complicated with a thousand ebb movements; the peculiarity of ebbs is
tests/les_miserables.txt:32599:to create intermixtures; hence the combination of very singular ideas;
tests/les_miserables.txt:32605:Other groups of minds were more serious. In that direction, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:32606:sounded principles, they attached themselves to the right. They grew
tests/les_miserables.txt:32607:enthusiastic for the absolute, they caught glimpses of infinite
tests/les_miserables.txt:32609:the sky and causes them to float in illimitable space. There is nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:32613:These advanced opinions had a double foundation. A beginning of mystery
tests/les_miserables.txt:32614:menaced “the established order of things,” which was suspicious and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32615:underhand. A sign which was revolutionary to the highest degree. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:32616:second thoughts of power meet the second thoughts of the populace in
tests/les_miserables.txt:32617:the mine. The incubation of insurrections gives the retort to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32618:premeditation of _coups d’état_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32620:There did not, as yet, exist in France any of those vast underlying
tests/les_miserables.txt:32622:but here and there there were dark underminings, which were in process
tests/les_miserables.txt:32624:existed at Paris, among other affiliations of that nature, the society
tests/les_miserables.txt:32627:What were these Friends of the A B C? A society which had for its
tests/les_miserables.txt:32628:object apparently the education of children, in reality the elevation
tests/les_miserables.txt:32631:They declared themselves the Friends of the A B C,—the _Abaissé_,—the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32633:It was a pun which we should do wrong to smile at. Puns are sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:32634:serious factors in politics; witness the _Castratus ad castra_, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:32636:witness: _Tu es Petrus et super hanc petram_, etc., etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32638:The Friends of the A B C were not numerous, it was a secret society in
tests/les_miserables.txt:32639:the state of embryo, we might almost say a coterie, if coteries ended
tests/les_miserables.txt:32640:in heroes. They assembled in Paris in two localities, near the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32641:fish-market, in a wine-shop called _Corinthe_, of which more will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:32642:heard later on, and near the Pantheon in a little café in the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:32643:Saint-Michel called the _Café Musain_, now torn down; the first of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32644:these meeting-places was close to the workingman, the second to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32647:The assemblies of the Friends of the A B C were usually held in a back
tests/les_miserables.txt:32650:This hall, which was tolerably remote from the café, with which it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32651:connected by an extremely long corridor, had two windows and an exit
tests/les_miserables.txt:32653:and drank, and gambled and laughed. There they conversed in very loud
tests/les_miserables.txt:32655:France under the Republic was nailed to the wall,—a sign quite
tests/les_miserables.txt:32656:sufficient to excite the suspicion of a police agent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32659:cordial terms with the working classes. Here are the names of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32660:principal ones. They belong, in a certain measure, to history:
tests/les_miserables.txt:32661:Enjolras, Combeferre, Jean Prouvaire, Feuilly, Courfeyrac, Bahorel,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32665:friendship. All, with the exception of Laigle, were from the South.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32669:This was a remarkable group. It vanished in the invisible depths which
tests/les_miserables.txt:32670:lie behind us. At the point of this drama which we have now reached, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:32673:of a tragic adventure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32678:Enjolras was a charming young man, who was capable of being terrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32679:He was angelically handsome. He was a savage Antinous. One would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:32680:said, to see the pensive thoughtfulness of his glance, that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:32681:already, in some previous state of existence, traversed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32682:revolutionary apocalypse. He possessed the tradition of it as though he
tests/les_miserables.txt:32683:had been a witness. He was acquainted with all the minute details of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32684:the great affair. A pontifical and warlike nature, a singular thing in
tests/les_miserables.txt:32685:a youth. He was an officiating priest and a man of war; from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32686:immediate point of view, a soldier of the democracy; above the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32687:contemporary movement, the priest of the ideal. His eyes were deep, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32688:lids a little red, his lower lip was thick and easily became
tests/les_miserables.txt:32689:disdainful, his brow was lofty. A great deal of brow in a face is like
tests/les_miserables.txt:32690:a great deal of horizon in a view. Like certain young men at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32691:beginning of this century and the end of the last, who became
tests/les_miserables.txt:32692:illustrious at an early age, he was endowed with excessive youth, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32693:was as rosy as a young girl, although subject to hours of pallor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32694:Already a man, he still seemed a child. His two and twenty years
tests/les_miserables.txt:32696:he were aware there was on earth a thing called woman. He had but one
tests/les_miserables.txt:32697:passion—the right; but one thought—to overthrow the obstacle. On Mount
tests/les_miserables.txt:32698:Aventine, he would have been Gracchus; in the Convention, he would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:32700:hear the carolling of the birds; the bare throat of Evadne would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:32702:Harmodius, thought flowers good for nothing except to conceal the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32703:sword. He was severe in his enjoyments. He chastely dropped his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:32704:before everything which was not the Republic. He was the marble lover
tests/les_miserables.txt:32705:of liberty. His speech was harshly inspired, and had the thrill of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32706:hymn. He was subject to unexpected outbursts of soul. Woe to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32707:love-affair which should have risked itself beside him! If any grisette
tests/les_miserables.txt:32708:of the Place Cambrai or the Rue Saint-Jean-de-Beauvais, seeing that
tests/les_miserables.txt:32709:face of a youth escaped from college, that page’s mien, those long,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32711:rosy cheeks, those fresh lips, those exquisite teeth, had conceived an
tests/les_miserables.txt:32712:appetite for that complete aurora, and had tried her beauty on
tests/les_miserables.txt:32713:Enjolras, an astounding and terrible glance would have promptly shown
tests/les_miserables.txt:32714:her the abyss, and would have taught her not to confound the mighty
tests/les_miserables.txt:32715:cherub of Ezekiel with the gallant Cherubino of Beaumarchais.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32717:By the side of Enjolras, who represented the logic of the Revolution,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32718:Combeferre represented its philosophy. Between the logic of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32719:Revolution and its philosophy there exists this difference—that its
tests/les_miserables.txt:32720:logic may end in war, whereas its philosophy can end only in peace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32721:Combeferre complemented and rectified Enjolras. He was less lofty, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:32722:broader. He desired to pour into all minds the extensive principles of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32723:general ideas: he said: “Revolution, but civilization”; and around the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32727:The first attached himself to Robespierre; the second confined himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:32728:to Condorcet. Combeferre lived the life of all the rest of the world
tests/les_miserables.txt:32732:_Homo_ and _vir_, that was the exact effect of their different shades.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32734:whiteness. He loved the word _citizen_, but he preferred the word
tests/les_miserables.txt:32736:everything, went to the theatres, attended the courses of public
tests/les_miserables.txt:32737:lecturers, learned the polarization of light from Arago, grew
tests/les_miserables.txt:32738:enthusiastic over a lesson in which Geoffroy Sainte-Hilaire explained
tests/les_miserables.txt:32739:the double function of the external carotid artery, and the internal,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32740:the one which makes the face, and the one which makes the brain; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:32741:kept up with what was going on, followed science step by step, compared
tests/les_miserables.txt:32742:Saint-Simon with Fourier, deciphered hieroglyphics, broke the pebble
tests/les_miserables.txt:32743:which he found and reasoned on geology, drew from memory a silkworm
tests/les_miserables.txt:32744:moth, pointed out the faulty French in the Dictionary of the Academy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32745:studied Puységur and Deleuze, affirmed nothing, not even miracles;
tests/les_miserables.txt:32747:_Moniteur_, reflected. He declared that the future lies in the hand of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32748:the schoolmaster, and busied himself with educational questions. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:32749:desired that society should labor without relaxation at the elevation
tests/les_miserables.txt:32750:of the moral and intellectual level, at coining science, at putting
tests/les_miserables.txt:32751:ideas into circulation, at increasing the mind in youthful persons, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32753:literary point of view confined to two or three centuries called
tests/les_miserables.txt:32754:classic, the tyrannical dogmatism of official pedants, scholastic
tests/les_miserables.txt:32755:prejudices and routines should end by converting our colleges into
tests/les_miserables.txt:32756:artificial oyster beds. He was learned, a purist, exact, a graduate of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32757:the Polytechnic, a close student, and at the same time, thoughtful
tests/les_miserables.txt:32758:“even to chimæras,” so his friends said. He believed in all dreams,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32759:railroads, the suppression of suffering in chirurgical operations, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32760:fixing of images in the dark chamber, the electric telegraph, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32761:steering of balloons. Moreover, he was not much alarmed by the citadels
tests/les_miserables.txt:32762:erected against the human mind in every direction, by superstition,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32763:despotism, and prejudice. He was one of those who think that science
tests/les_miserables.txt:32764:will eventually turn the position. Enjolras was a chief, Combeferre was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32765:a guide. One would have liked to fight under the one and to march
tests/les_miserables.txt:32766:behind the other. It is not that Combeferre was not capable of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32767:fighting, he did not refuse a hand-to-hand combat with the obstacle,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32768:and to attack it by main force and explosively; but it suited him
tests/les_miserables.txt:32769:better to bring the human race into accord with its destiny gradually,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32770:by means of education, the inculcation of axioms, the promulgation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32771:positive laws; and, between two lights, his preference was rather for
tests/les_miserables.txt:32772:illumination than for conflagration. A conflagration can create an
tests/les_miserables.txt:32773:aurora, no doubt, but why not await the dawn? A volcano illuminates,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32776:sublime. A light troubled by smoke, progress purchased at the expense
tests/les_miserables.txt:32777:of violence, only half satisfied this tender and serious spirit. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:32778:headlong precipitation of a people into the truth, a ‘93, terrified
tests/les_miserables.txt:32780:detected putrefaction and death; on the whole, he preferred scum to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32781:miasma, and he preferred the torrent to the cesspool, and the falls of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32782:Niagara to the lake of Montfaucon. In short, he desired neither halt
tests/les_miserables.txt:32783:nor haste. While his tumultuous friends, captivated by the absolute,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32785:inclined to let progress, good progress, take its own course; he may
tests/les_miserables.txt:32786:have been cold, but he was pure; methodical, but irreproachable;
tests/les_miserables.txt:32787:phlegmatic, but imperturbable. Combeferre would have knelt and clasped
tests/les_miserables.txt:32788:his hands to enable the future to arrive in all its candor, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:32789:nothing might disturb the immense and virtuous evolution of the races.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32790:_The good must be innocent_, he repeated incessantly. And in fact, if
tests/les_miserables.txt:32791:the grandeur of the Revolution consists in keeping the dazzling ideal
tests/les_miserables.txt:32795:and Danton, who incarnates the other, that difference which separates
tests/les_miserables.txt:32799:Jehan, owing to that petty momentary freak which mingled with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32800:powerful and profound movement whence sprang the very essential study
tests/les_miserables.txt:32801:of the Middle Ages. Jean Prouvaire was in love; he cultivated a pot of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32803:woman, wept over the child, confounded God and the future in the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:32804:confidence, and blamed the Revolution for having caused the fall of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32805:royal head, that of André Chénier. His voice was ordinarily delicate,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32811:Juvenal, Æschylus, and Isaiah. In French, he preferred Corneille to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32812:Racine, and Agrippa d’Aubigné to Corneille. He loved to saunter through
tests/les_miserables.txt:32813:fields of wild oats and corn-flowers, and busied himself with clouds
tests/les_miserables.txt:32814:nearly as much as with events. His mind had two attitudes, one on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32816:contemplated. All day long, he buried himself in social questions,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32817:salary, capital, credit, marriage, religion, liberty of thought,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32818:education, penal servitude, poverty, association, property, production
tests/les_miserables.txt:32819:and sharing, the enigma of this lower world which covers the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:32827:mother, who earned with difficulty three francs a day, and had but one
tests/les_miserables.txt:32828:thought, to deliver the world. He had one other preoccupation, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32829:educate himself; he called this also, delivering himself. He had taught
tests/les_miserables.txt:32831:himself. Feuilly had a generous heart. The range of his embrace was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32833:him, he meditated on his country. He brooded with the profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:32834:divination of the man of the people, over what we now call the _idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32835:the nationality_, had learned history with the express object of raging
tests/les_miserables.txt:32836:with full knowledge of the case. In this club of young Utopians,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32837:occupied chiefly with France, he represented the outside world. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:32838:for his specialty Greece, Poland, Hungary, Roumania, Italy. He uttered
tests/les_miserables.txt:32839:these names incessantly, appropriately and inappropriately, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32840:tenacity of right. The violations of Turkey on Greece and Thessaly, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32841:Russia on Warsaw, of Austria on Venice, enraged him. Above all things,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32842:the great violence of 1772 aroused him. There is no more sovereign
tests/les_miserables.txt:32843:eloquence than the true in indignation; he was eloquent with that
tests/les_miserables.txt:32844:eloquence. He was inexhaustible on that infamous date of 1772, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32845:subject of that noble and valiant race suppressed by treason, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:32846:three-sided crime, on that monstrous ambush, the prototype and pattern
tests/les_miserables.txt:32847:of all those horrible suppressions of states, which, since that time,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32848:have struck many a noble nation, and have annulled their certificate of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32849:birth, so to speak. All contemporary social crimes have their origin in
tests/les_miserables.txt:32850:the partition of Poland. The partition of Poland is a theorem of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:32851:all present political outrages are the corollaries. There has not been
tests/les_miserables.txt:32852:a despot, nor a traitor for nearly a century back, who has not signed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32853:approved, counter-signed, and copied, _ne variatur_, the partition of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32854:Poland. When the record of modern treasons was examined, that was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32855:first thing which made its appearance. The congress of Vienna consulted
tests/les_miserables.txt:32856:that crime before consummating its own. 1772 sounded the onset; 1815
tests/les_miserables.txt:32857:was the death of the game. Such was Feuilly’s habitual text. This poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:32858:workingman had constituted himself the tutor of Justice, and she
tests/les_miserables.txt:32859:recompensed him by rendering him great. The fact is, that there is
tests/les_miserables.txt:32860:eternity in right. Warsaw can no more be Tartar than Venice can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:32862:them so. Sooner or later, the submerged part floats to the surface and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32863:reappears. Greece becomes Greece again, Italy is once more Italy. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:32865:nation cannot be allowed by prescription. These lofty deeds of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32866:rascality have no future. A nation cannot have its mark extracted like
tests/les_miserables.txt:32867:a pocket handkerchief.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32869:Courfeyrac had a father who was called M. de Courfeyrac. One of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32871:aristocracy and the nobility was to believe in the particle. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:32872:particle, as every one knows, possesses no significance. But the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32873:bourgeois of the epoch of _la Minerve_ estimated so highly that poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:32874:_de_, that they thought themselves bound to abdicate it. M. de
tests/les_miserables.txt:32875:Chauvelin had himself called M. Chauvelin; M. de Caumartin, M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32876:Caumartin; M. de Constant de Robecque, Benjamin Constant; M. de
tests/les_miserables.txt:32877:Lafayette, M. Lafayette. Courfeyrac had not wished to remain behind the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32878:rest, and called himself plain Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32880:We might almost, so far as Courfeyrac is concerned, stop here, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32881:confine ourselves to saying with regard to what remains: “For
tests/les_miserables.txt:32882:Courfeyrac, see Tholomyès.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32885:Courfeyrac had, in fact, that animation of youth which may be called
tests/les_miserables.txt:32887:playfulness of the kitten, and all this grace ends, with the bourgeois,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32888:on two legs, and with the tomcat, on four paws.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32891:successive levies of youth who traverse the schools, who pass it from
tests/les_miserables.txt:32892:hand to hand, _quasi cursores_, and is almost always exactly the same;
tests/les_miserables.txt:32894:Courfeyrac in 1828 would have thought he heard Tholomyès in 1817. Only,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32895:Courfeyrac was an honorable fellow. Beneath the apparent similarities
tests/les_miserables.txt:32896:of the exterior mind, the difference between him and Tholomyès was very
tests/les_miserables.txt:32897:great. The latent man which existed in the two was totally different in
tests/les_miserables.txt:32898:the first from what it was in the second. There was in Tholomyès a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32899:district attorney, and in Courfeyrac a paladin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32901:Enjolras was the chief, Combeferre was the guide, Courfeyrac was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32902:centre. The others gave more light, he shed more warmth; the truth is,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32903:that he possessed all the qualities of a centre, roundness and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32904:radiance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32906:Bahorel had figured in the bloody tumult of June, 1822, on the occasion
tests/les_miserables.txt:32909:Bahorel was a good-natured mortal, who kept bad company, brave, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32912:possible; he had daring waistcoats, and scarlet opinions; a wholesale
tests/les_miserables.txt:32913:blusterer, that is to say, loving nothing so much as a quarrel, unless
tests/les_miserables.txt:32914:it were an uprising; and nothing so much as an uprising, unless it were
tests/les_miserables.txt:32916:pavement, then to demolish a government, just to see the effect of it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:32918:practise it. He had taken for his device: “Never a lawyer,” and for his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32919:armorial bearings a nightstand in which was visible a square cap. Every
tests/les_miserables.txt:32920:time that he passed the law-school, which rarely happened, he buttoned
tests/les_miserables.txt:32921:up his frock-coat,—the paletot had not yet been invented,—and took
tests/les_miserables.txt:32922:hygienic precautions. Of the school porter he said: “What a fine old
tests/les_miserables.txt:32923:man!” and of the dean, M. Delvincourt: “What a monument!” In his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32924:lectures he espied subjects for ballads, and in his professors
tests/les_miserables.txt:32925:occasions for caricature. He wasted a tolerably large allowance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32926:something like three thousand francs a year, in doing nothing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32928:He had peasant parents whom he had contrived to imbue with respect for
tests/les_miserables.txt:32935:Bahorel, a man of caprice, was scattered over numerous cafés; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32940:He served as a connecting link between the Friends of the A B C and
tests/les_miserables.txt:32941:other still unorganized groups, which were destined to take form later
tests/les_miserables.txt:32944:In this conclave of young heads, there was one bald member.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32947:him to enter a hackney-coach on the day when he emigrated, was wont to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32948:relate, that in 1814, on his return to France, as the King was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32953:“Sire, a post-office.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:32962:The King frowned, glanced at the signature of the petition and beheld
tests/les_miserables.txt:32963:the name written thus: LESGLE. This non-Bonaparte orthography touched
tests/les_miserables.txt:32965:petition, “I had for ancestor a keeper of the hounds surnamed
tests/les_miserables.txt:32966:Lesgueules. This surname furnished my name. I am called Lesgueules, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:32967:contraction Lesgle, and by corruption l’Aigle.” This caused the King to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32968:smile broadly. Later on he gave the man the posting office of Meaux,
tests/les_miserables.txt:32969:either intentionally or accidentally.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32972:he signed himself, Légle [de Meaux]. As an abbreviation, his companions
tests/les_miserables.txt:32973:called him Bossuet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32975:Bossuet was a gay but unlucky fellow. His specialty was not to succeed
tests/les_miserables.txt:32979:speculation. He had nothing left. He possessed knowledge and wit, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:32980:all he did miscarried. Everything failed him and everybody deceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:32982:splitting wood, he cut off a finger. If he had a mistress, he speedily
tests/les_miserables.txt:32983:discovered that he had a friend also. Some misfortune happened to him
tests/les_miserables.txt:32984:every moment, hence his joviality. He said: “I live under falling
tests/les_miserables.txt:32985:tiles.” He was not easily astonished, because, for him, an accident was
tests/les_miserables.txt:32986:what he had foreseen, he took his bad luck serenely, and smiled at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:32988:poor, but his fund of good humor was inexhaustible. He soon reached his
tests/les_miserables.txt:32990:doors, he saluted this old acquaintance cordially, he tapped all
tests/les_miserables.txt:32991:catastrophes on the stomach; he was familiar with fatality to the point
tests/les_miserables.txt:32992:of calling it by its nickname: “Good day, Guignon,” he said to it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:32994:These persecutions of fate had rendered him inventive. He was full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:32995:resources. He had no money, but he found means, when it seemed good to
tests/les_miserables.txt:32996:him, to indulge in “unbridled extravagance.” One night, he went so far
tests/les_miserables.txt:32997:as to eat a “hundred francs” in a supper with a wench, which inspired
tests/les_miserables.txt:33002:Bossuet was slowly directing his steps towards the profession of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33004:Bossuet had not much domicile, sometimes none at all. He lodged now
tests/les_miserables.txt:33006:medicine. He was two years younger than Bossuet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33008:Joly was the “malade imaginaire” junior. What he had won in medicine
tests/les_miserables.txt:33009:was to be more of an invalid than a doctor. At three and twenty he
tests/les_miserables.txt:33010:thought himself a valetudinarian, and passed his life in inspecting his
tests/les_miserables.txt:33011:tongue in the mirror. He affirmed that man becomes magnetic like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33012:needle, and in his chamber he placed his bed with its head to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33013:south, and the foot to the north, so that, at night, the circulation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33014:his blood might not be interfered with by the great electric current of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33016:the gayest of them all. All these young, maniacal, puny, merry
tests/les_miserables.txt:33017:incoherences lived in harmony together, and the result was an eccentric
tests/les_miserables.txt:33018:and agreeable being whom his comrades, who were prodigal of winged
tests/les_miserables.txt:33019:consonants, called Jolllly. “You may fly away on the four _L’s_,” Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:33022:Joly had a trick of touching his nose with the tip of his cane, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:33023:is an indication of a sagacious mind.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33025:All these young men who differed so greatly, and who, on the whole, can
tests/les_miserables.txt:33026:only be discussed seriously, held the same religion: Progress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33028:All were the direct sons of the French Revolution. The most giddy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33029:them became solemn when they pronounced that date: ’89. Their fathers
tests/les_miserables.txt:33030:in the flesh had been, either royalists, doctrinaires, it matters not
tests/les_miserables.txt:33031:what; this confusion anterior to themselves, who were young, did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:33032:concern them at all; the pure blood of principle ran in their veins.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33033:They attached themselves, without intermediate shades, to incorruptible
tests/les_miserables.txt:33036:Affiliated and initiated, they sketched out the ideal underground.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33038:Among all these glowing hearts and thoroughly convinced minds, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:33039:was one sceptic. How came he there? By juxtaposition. This sceptic’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:33041:this rebus: R. Grantaire was a man who took good care not to believe in
tests/les_miserables.txt:33043:during their course at Paris; he knew that the best coffee was to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:33045:that good cakes and lasses were to be found at the Ermitage, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33046:Boulevard du Maine, spatchcocked chickens at Mother Sauget’s, excellent
tests/les_miserables.txt:33047:matelotes at the Barrière de la Cunette, and a certain thin white wine
tests/les_miserables.txt:33048:at the Barrière du Compat. He knew the best place for everything; in
tests/les_miserables.txt:33049:addition, boxing and foot-fencing and some dances; and he was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33050:thorough single-stick player. He was a tremendous drinker to boot. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:33051:was inordinately homely: the prettiest boot-stitcher of that day, Irma
tests/les_miserables.txt:33052:Boissy, enraged with his homeliness, pronounced sentence on him as
tests/les_miserables.txt:33054:be disconcerted. He stared tenderly and fixedly at all women, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33055:air of saying to them all: “If I only chose!” and of trying to make his
tests/les_miserables.txt:33056:comrades believe that he was in general demand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33058:All those words: rights of the people, rights of man, the social
tests/les_miserables.txt:33059:contract, the French Revolution, the Republic, democracy, humanity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33060:civilization, religion, progress, came very near to signifying nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:33061:whatever to Grantaire. He smiled at them. Scepticism, that caries of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33062:the intelligence, had not left him a single whole idea. He lived with
tests/les_miserables.txt:33063:irony. This was his axiom: “There is but one certainty, my full glass.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33066:in advance to be dead,” he exclaimed. He said of the crucifix: “There
tests/les_miserables.txt:33067:is a gibbet which has been a success.” A rover, a gambler, a libertine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33068:often drunk, he displeased these young dreamers by humming incessantly:
tests/les_miserables.txt:33071:However, this sceptic had one fanaticism. This fanaticism was neither a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33072:dogma, nor an idea, nor an art, nor a science; it was a man: Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33074:anarchical scoffer unite himself in this phalanx of absolute minds? To
tests/les_miserables.txt:33076:ideas? No. By his character. A phenomenon which is often observable. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:33077:sceptic who adheres to a believer is as simple as the law of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33078:complementary colors. That which we lack attracts us. No one loves the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33080:always has his eyes fixed on heaven. Why? In order to watch the bird in
tests/les_miserables.txt:33081:its flight. Grantaire, in whom writhed doubt, loved to watch faith soar
tests/les_miserables.txt:33082:in Enjolras. He had need of Enjolras. That chaste, healthy, firm,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33083:upright, hard, candid nature charmed him, without his being clearly
tests/les_miserables.txt:33085:occurred to him. He admired his opposite by instinct. His soft,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33086:yielding, dislocated, sickly, shapeless ideas attached themselves to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33087:Enjolras as to a spinal column. His moral backbone leaned on that
tests/les_miserables.txt:33088:firmness. Grantaire in the presence of Enjolras became some one once
tests/les_miserables.txt:33089:more. He was, himself, moreover, composed of two elements, which were,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33090:to all appearance, incompatible. He was ironical and cordial. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:33091:indifference loved. His mind could get along without belief, but his
tests/les_miserables.txt:33092:heart could not get along without friendship. A profound contradiction;
tests/les_miserables.txt:33093:for an affection is a conviction. His nature was thus constituted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33095:wrong side. They are Pollux, Patrocles, Nisus, Eudamidas, Ephestion,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33096:Pechmeja. They only exist on condition that they are backed up with
tests/les_miserables.txt:33097:another man; their name is a sequel, and is only written preceded by
tests/les_miserables.txt:33098:the conjunction _and_; and their existence is not their own; it is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33099:other side of an existence which is not theirs. Grantaire was one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33103:alphabet. In the series O and P are inseparable. You can, at will,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33104:pronounce O and P or Orestes and Pylades.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33106:Grantaire, Enjolras’ true satellite, inhabited this circle of young
tests/les_miserables.txt:33108:followed them everywhere. His joy was to see these forms go and come
tests/les_miserables.txt:33109:through the fumes of wine. They tolerated him on account of his good
tests/les_miserables.txt:33112:Enjolras, the believer, disdained this sceptic; and, a sober man
tests/les_miserables.txt:33113:himself, scorned this drunkard. He accorded him a little lofty pity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33114:Grantaire was an unaccepted Pylades. Always harshly treated by
tests/les_miserables.txt:33115:Enjolras, roughly repulsed, rejected yet ever returning to the charge,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33125:On a certain afternoon, which had, as will be seen hereafter, some
tests/les_miserables.txt:33126:coincidence with the events heretofore related, Laigle de Meaux was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33128:Musain. He had the air of a caryatid on a vacation; he carried nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:33129:but his reverie, however. He was staring at the Place Saint-Michel. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:33130:lean one’s back against a thing is equivalent to lying down while
tests/les_miserables.txt:33131:standing erect, which attitude is not hated by thinkers. Laigle de
tests/les_miserables.txt:33132:Meaux was pondering without melancholy, over a little misadventure
tests/les_miserables.txt:33133:which had befallen him two days previously at the law-school, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:33134:had modified his personal plans for the future, plans which were rather
tests/les_miserables.txt:33135:indistinct in any case.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33137:Reverie does not prevent a cab from passing by, nor the dreamer from
tests/les_miserables.txt:33138:taking note of that cab. Laigle de Meaux, whose eyes were straying
tests/les_miserables.txt:33139:about in a sort of diffuse lounging, perceived, athwart his
tests/les_miserables.txt:33140:somnambulism, a two-wheeled vehicle proceeding through the place, at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33141:foot pace and apparently in indecision. For whom was this cabriolet?
tests/les_miserables.txt:33143:coachman, sat a young man, and in front of the young man lay a rather
tests/les_miserables.txt:33145:inscribed in large black letters on a card which was sewn to the stuff:
tests/les_miserables.txt:33148:This name caused Laigle to change his attitude. He drew himself up and
tests/les_miserables.txt:33149:hurled this apostrophe at the young man in the cabriolet:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:33151:“Monsieur Marius Pontmercy!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33154:The cabriolet thus addressed came to a halt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33161:“You are M. Marius Pontmercy?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33169:“How so?” demanded Marius; for it was he: in fact, he had just quitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:33170:his grandfather’s, and had before him a face which he now beheld for
tests/les_miserables.txt:33176:Marius thought he had encountered a wag, the beginning of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33177:mystification in the open street. He was not in a very good humor at
tests/les_miserables.txt:33180:“You were not at the school day before yesterday.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33186:“That is certain.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33191:“Yes, sir. Like yourself. Day before yesterday, I entered the school,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33192:by chance. You know, one does have such freaks sometimes. The professor
tests/les_miserables.txt:33193:was just calling the roll. You are not unaware that they are very
tests/les_miserables.txt:33194:ridiculous on such occasions. At the third call, unanswered, your name
tests/les_miserables.txt:33195:is erased from the list. Sixty francs in the gulf.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33200:“It was Blondeau who was making the call. You know Blondeau, he has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33201:very pointed and very malicious nose, and he delights to scent out the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33203:being compromised by that letter. The call was not going badly. No
tests/les_miserables.txt:33206:an execution to-day.’ All at once Blondeau calls, ‘Marius Pontmercy!’
tests/les_miserables.txt:33208:‘Marius Pontmercy!’ And he takes his pen. Monsieur, I have bowels of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33209:compassion. I said to myself hastily: ‘Here’s a brave fellow who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:33210:going to get scratched out. Attention. Here is a veritable mortal who
tests/les_miserables.txt:33211:is not exact. He’s not a good student. Here is none of your
tests/les_miserables.txt:33213:letters, theology, science, and sapience, one of those dull wits cut by
tests/les_miserables.txt:33215:who practises country jaunts, who cultivates the grisette, who pays
tests/les_miserables.txt:33216:court to the fair sex, who is at this very moment, perhaps, with my
tests/les_miserables.txt:33218:dipped his pen in, all black with erasures in the ink, cast his yellow
tests/les_miserables.txt:33219:eyes round the audience room, and repeated for the third time: ‘Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:33220:Pontmercy!’ I replied: ‘Present!’ This is why you were not crossed
tests/les_miserables.txt:33232:“Nothing is more simple. I was close to the desk to reply, and close to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33234:certain intensity. All of a sudden, Blondeau, who must be the malicious
tests/les_miserables.txt:33242:“Monsieur, Blondeau came to this fine name, and called: ‘Laigle!’ I
tests/les_miserables.txt:33244:tiger, and says to me: ‘If you are Pontmercy, you are not Laigle.’ A
tests/les_miserables.txt:33245:phrase which has a disobliging air for you, but which was lugubrious
tests/les_miserables.txt:33246:only for me. That said, he crossed me off.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33249:Marius exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:33256:he is dead. There will be no great change required in his gauntness, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:33257:his pallor, in his coldness, and in his smell. And I say: ‘_Erudimini
tests/les_miserables.txt:33258:qui judicatis terram_. Here lies Blondeau, Blondeau the Nose, Blondeau
tests/les_miserables.txt:33259:Nasica, the ox of discipline, _bos disciplinæ_, the bloodhound of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33260:password, the angel of the roll-call, who was upright, square, exact,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33261:rigid, honest, and hideous. God crossed him off as he crossed me off.’”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33270:future, be exact.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33285:“And I am delighted. I was on the brink of becoming a lawyer. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:33286:erasure saves me. I renounce the triumphs of the bar. I shall not
tests/les_miserables.txt:33287:defend the widow, and I shall not attack the orphan. No more toga, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:33289:indebted for it, Monsieur Pontmercy. I intend to pay a solemn call of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33293:“In this cab,” said Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33295:“A sign of opulence,” retorted Laigle calmly. “I congratulate you. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:33296:have there a rent of nine thousand francs per annum.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33299:At that moment, Courfeyrac emerged from the café.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33304:of it; but there is a sort of history attached to it, and I don’t know
tests/les_miserables.txt:33308:“Come to my place, sir,” said Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33313:“Hold your tongue, Bossuet,” said Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33321:Courfeyrac entered the cab.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33323:“Coachman,” said he, “hotel de la Porte-Saint-Jacques.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33326:And that very evening, Marius found himself installed in a chamber of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33327:the hotel de la Porte-Saint-Jacques side by side with Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33335:In a few days, Marius had become Courfeyrac’s friend. Youth is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33336:season for prompt welding and the rapid healing of scars. Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:33337:breathed freely in Courfeyrac’s society, a decidedly new thing for him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33338:Courfeyrac put no questions to him. He did not even think of such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33339:thing. At that age, faces disclose everything on the spot. Words are
tests/les_miserables.txt:33340:superfluous. There are young men of whom it can be said that their
tests/les_miserables.txt:33341:countenances chatter. One looks at them and one knows them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33343:One morning, however, Courfeyrac abruptly addressed this interrogation
tests/les_miserables.txt:33346:“By the way, have you any political opinions?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33354:“A democrat-Bonapartist.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33357:“The gray hue of a reassured rat,” said Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33359:On the following day, Courfeyrac introduced Marius at the Café Musain.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33362:B C. He presented him to the other comrades, saying this simple word
tests/les_miserables.txt:33363:which Marius did not understand: “A pupil.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33369:Marius, up to that time solitary and inclined to soliloquy, and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33371:covey of young men around him. All these various initiatives solicited
tests/les_miserables.txt:33372:his attention at once, and pulled him about. The tumultuous movements
tests/les_miserables.txt:33375:difficulty in recovering them. He heard them talk of philosophy, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33376:literature, of art, of history, of religion, in unexpected fashion. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:33377:caught glimpses of strange aspects; and, as he did not place them in
tests/les_miserables.txt:33378:proper perspective, he was not altogether sure that it was not chaos
tests/les_miserables.txt:33381:suspected, with uneasiness, and without daring to avow it to himself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33382:that he was not. The angle at which he saw everything began to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:33383:displaced anew. A certain oscillation set all the horizons of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:33387:It seemed as though there were no “consecrated things” for those young
tests/les_miserables.txt:33388:men. Marius heard singular propositions on every sort of subject, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:33392:from the ancient repertory called classic: “Down with tragedy dear to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33393:the bourgeois!” cried Bahorel. And Marius heard Combeferre reply:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:33396:bourgeoisie must be left at peace on that score. Bewigged tragedy has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33397:reason for its existence, and I am not one of those who, by order of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33398:Æschylus, contest its right to existence. There are rough outlines in
tests/les_miserables.txt:33399:nature; there are, in creation, ready-made parodies; a beak which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:33400:not a beak, wings which are not wings, gills which are not gills, paws
tests/les_miserables.txt:33401:which are not paws, a cry of pain which arouses a desire to laugh,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33402:there is the duck. Now, since poultry exists by the side of the bird, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:33403:do not see why classic tragedy should not exist in the face of antique
tests/les_miserables.txt:33407:Or chance decreed that Marius should traverse Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau
tests/les_miserables.txt:33408:between Enjolras and Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33410:Courfeyrac took his arm:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:33412:“Pay attention. This is the Rue Plâtrière, now called Rue Jean-Jacques
tests/les_miserables.txt:33413:Rousseau, on account of a singular household which lived in it sixty
tests/les_miserables.txt:33414:years ago. This consisted of Jean-Jacques and Thérèse. From time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33416:Jean-Jacques represented them as foundlings.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33419:And Enjolras addressed Courfeyrac roughly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:33421:“Silence in the presence of Jean-Jacques! I admire that man. He denied
tests/les_miserables.txt:33422:his own children, that may be; but he adopted the people.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33425:Not one of these young men articulated the word: The Emperor. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:33427:“Bonaparte.” Enjolras pronounced it “Buonaparte.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33438:One of the conversations among the young men, at which Marius was
tests/les_miserables.txt:33439:present and in which he sometimes joined, was a veritable shock to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:33442:This took place in the back room of the Café Musain. Nearly all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33443:Friends of the A B C had convened that evening. The argand lamp was
tests/les_miserables.txt:33445:and with noise. With the exception of Enjolras and Marius, who held
tests/les_miserables.txt:33446:their peace, all were haranguing rather at hap-hazard. Conversations
tests/les_miserables.txt:33447:between comrades sometimes are subject to these peaceable tumults. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:33448:was a game and an uproar as much as a conversation. They tossed words
tests/les_miserables.txt:33449:to each other and caught them up in turn. They were chattering in all
tests/les_miserables.txt:33452:No woman was admitted to this back room, except Louison, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33453:dish-washer of the café, who passed through it from time to time, to go
tests/les_miserables.txt:33457:Grantaire, thoroughly drunk, was deafening the corner of which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:33458:taken possession, reasoning and contradicting at the top of his lungs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33462:an attack of apoplexy, and that I am one of the dozen leeches which
tests/les_miserables.txt:33465:worth nothing. One breaks one’s neck in living. Life is a theatre set
tests/les_miserables.txt:33466:in which there are but few practicable entrances. Happiness is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:33467:antique reliquary painted on one side only. Ecclesiastes says: ‘All is
tests/les_miserables.txt:33469:not wishing to go stark naked, clothed himself in vanity. O vanity! The
tests/les_miserables.txt:33470:patching up of everything with big words! a kitchen is a laboratory, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33471:dancer is a professor, an acrobat is a gymnast, a boxer is a pugilist,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33472:an apothecary is a chemist, a wigmaker is an artist, a hodman is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:33473:architect, a jockey is a sportsman, a wood-louse is a pterigybranche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33477:other. What are called honors and dignities, and even dignity and
tests/les_miserables.txt:33478:honor, are generally of pinchbeck. Kings make playthings of human
tests/les_miserables.txt:33479:pride. Caligula made a horse a consul; Charles II. made a knight of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33480:sirloin. Wrap yourself up now, then, between Consul Incitatus and
tests/les_miserables.txt:33481:Baronet Roastbeef. As for the intrinsic value of people, it is no
tests/les_miserables.txt:33482:longer respectable in the least. Listen to the panegyric which neighbor
tests/les_miserables.txt:33483:makes of neighbor. White on white is ferocious; if the lily could
tests/les_miserables.txt:33485:prating of a devout woman is more venomous than the asp and the cobra.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33487:of things; but I know nothing. For instance, I have always been witty;
tests/les_miserables.txt:33488:when I was a pupil of Gros, instead of daubing wretched little
tests/les_miserables.txt:33489:pictures, I passed my time in pilfering apples; _rapin_24 is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33490:masculine of _rapine_. So much for myself; as for the rest of you, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:33491:are worth no more than I am. I scoff at your perfections, excellencies,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33492:and qualities. Every good quality tends towards a defect; economy
tests/les_miserables.txt:33493:borders on avarice, the generous man is next door to the prodigal, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33495:trifle bigoted; there are just as many vices in virtue as there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:33496:holes in Diogenes’ cloak. Whom do you admire, the slain or the slayer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33501:was from the hand of the Greek sculptor Strongylion, who also carved
tests/les_miserables.txt:33502:that figure of an Amazon known as the Beautiful Leg, Eucnemos, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:33503:Nero carried with him in his travels. This Strongylion left but two
tests/les_miserables.txt:33504:statues which placed Nero and Brutus in accord. Brutus was in love with
tests/les_miserables.txt:33506:repetition. One century is the plagiarist of the other. The battle of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33507:Marengo copies the battle of Pydna; the Tolbiac of Clovis and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33508:Austerlitz of Napoleon are as like each other as two drops of water. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:33509:don’t attach much importance to victory. Nothing is so stupid as to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33510:conquer; true glory lies in convincing. But try to prove something! If
tests/les_miserables.txt:33511:you are content with success, what mediocrity, and with conquering,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33512:what wretchedness! Alas, vanity and cowardice everywhere. Everything
tests/les_miserables.txt:33513:obeys success, even grammar. _Si volet usus_, says Horace. Therefore I
tests/les_miserables.txt:33514:disdain the human race. Shall we descend to the party at all? Do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:33516:Shall it be Greece? The Athenians, those Parisians of days gone by,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33517:slew Phocion, as we might say Coligny, and fawned upon tyrants to such
tests/les_miserables.txt:33518:an extent that Anacephorus said of Pisistratus: “His urine attracts the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33519:bees.” The most prominent man in Greece for fifty years was that
tests/les_miserables.txt:33522:There stood on the great square in Corinth a statue carved by Silanion
tests/les_miserables.txt:33523:and catalogued by Pliny; this statue represented Episthates. What did
tests/les_miserables.txt:33524:Episthates do? He invented a trip. That sums up Greece and glory. Let
tests/les_miserables.txt:33525:us pass on to others. Shall I admire England? Shall I admire France?
tests/les_miserables.txt:33526:France? Why? Because of Paris? I have just told you my opinion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33527:Athens. England? Why? Because of London? I hate Carthage. And then,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33528:London, the metropolis of luxury, is the headquarters of wretchedness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33530:Charing-Cross alone. Such is Albion. I add, as the climax, that I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:33531:seen an Englishwoman dancing in a wreath of roses and blue spectacles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33535:_Cotton is king_, what remains of America? Germany is the lymph, Italy
tests/les_miserables.txt:33536:is the bile. Shall we go into ecstasies over Russia? Voltaire admired
tests/les_miserables.txt:33539:delicate. A decapitated Alexis, a poignarded Peter, a strangled Paul,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33540:another Paul crushed flat with kicks, divers Ivans strangled, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:33541:their throats cut, numerous Nicholases and Basils poisoned, all this
tests/les_miserables.txt:33542:indicates that the palace of the Emperors of Russia is in a condition
tests/les_miserables.txt:33543:of flagrant insalubrity. All civilized peoples offer this detail to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33544:admiration of the thinker; war; now, war, civilized war, exhausts and
tests/les_miserables.txt:33546:Trabuceros in the gorges of Mont Jaxa to the marauding of the Comanche
tests/les_miserables.txt:33548:certainly better than Asia?’ I admit that Asia is a farce; but I do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:33549:precisely see what you find to laugh at in the Grand Lama, you peoples
tests/les_miserables.txt:33550:of the west, who have mingled with your fashions and your elegances all
tests/les_miserables.txt:33551:the complicated filth of majesty, from the dirty chemise of Queen
tests/les_miserables.txt:33552:Isabella to the chamber-chair of the Dauphin. Gentlemen of the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:33553:race, I tell you, not a bit of it! It is at Brussels that the most beer
tests/les_miserables.txt:33554:is consumed, at Stockholm the most brandy, at Madrid the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:33555:chocolate, at Amsterdam the most gin, at London the most wine, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:33556:Constantinople the most coffee, at Paris the most absinthe; there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:33557:all the useful notions. Paris carries the day, in short. In Paris, even
tests/les_miserables.txt:33558:the rag-pickers are sybarites; Diogenes would have loved to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33559:rag-picker of the Place Maubert better than to be a philosopher at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33560:Piræus. Learn this in addition; the wineshops of the rag-pickers are
tests/les_miserables.txt:33561:called _bibines_; the most celebrated are the _Saucepan_ and _The
tests/les_miserables.txt:33562:Slaughter-House_. Hence, tea-gardens, goguettes, caboulots, bouibuis,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33563:mastroquets, bastringues, manezingues, bibines of the rag-pickers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33564:caravanseries of the caliphs, I certify to you, I am a voluptuary, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:33565:eat at Richard’s at forty sous a head, I must have Persian carpets to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33570:Thus did Grantaire, more than intoxicated, launch into speech, catching
tests/les_miserables.txt:33571:at the dish-washer in her passage, from his corner in the back room of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33574:Bossuet, extending his hand towards him, tried to impose silence on
tests/les_miserables.txt:33577:“Aigle de Meaux, down with your paws. You produce on me no effect with
tests/les_miserables.txt:33578:your gesture of Hippocrates refusing Artaxerxes’ bric-à-brac. I excuse
tests/les_miserables.txt:33581:success, man is a failure. God made a mistake with that animal. A crowd
tests/les_miserables.txt:33582:offers a choice of ugliness. The first comer is a wretch,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33584:complicated with melancholy, with homesickness, plus hypochondria, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:33589:“Silence then, capital R!” resumed Bossuet, who was discussing a point
tests/les_miserables.txt:33590:of law behind the scenes, and who was plunged more than waist high in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33591:phrase of judicial slang, of which this is the conclusion:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:33594:amateur attorney, I maintain this: that, in accordance with the terms
tests/les_miserables.txt:33595:of the customs of Normandy, at Saint-Michel, and for each year, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:33598:as those seized with inheritance, and that, for all emphyteuses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33599:leases, freeholds, contracts of domain, mortgages—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33602:“Echo, plaintive nymph,” hummed Grantaire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33605:and a pen between two glasses of brandy, announced that a vaudeville
tests/les_miserables.txt:33606:was being sketched out.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33608:This great affair was being discussed in a low voice, and the two heads
tests/les_miserables.txt:33609:at work touched each other: “Let us begin by finding names. When one
tests/les_miserables.txt:33610:has the names, one finds the subject.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33613:“That is true. Dictate. I will write.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33622:“Of course.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33637:Beside the vaudeville aspirants, another group, which was also taking
tests/les_miserables.txt:33638:advantage of the uproar to talk low, was discussing a duel. An old
tests/les_miserables.txt:33639:fellow of thirty was counselling a young one of eighteen, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:33642:“The deuce! Look out for yourself. He is a fine swordsman. His play is
tests/les_miserables.txt:33643:neat. He has the attack, no wasted feints, wrist, dash, lightning, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33644:just parade, mathematical parries, _bigre!_ and he is left-handed.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33650:“You are in luck, that you are,” Joly was saying. “You have a mistress
tests/les_miserables.txt:33655:to laugh. That encourages one to deceive her. To see her gay removes
tests/les_miserables.txt:33656:your remorse; if you see her sad, your conscience pricks you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33659:“Ingrate! a woman who laughs is such a good thing! And you never
tests/les_miserables.txt:33663:“That is because of the treaty which we have made. On forming our
tests/les_miserables.txt:33664:little Holy Alliance we assigned ourselves each our frontier, which we
tests/les_miserables.txt:33665:never cross. What is situated on the side of winter belongs to Vaud, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:33666:the side of the wind to Gex. Hence the peace.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33669:“Peace is happiness digesting.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33676:“She sulks at me with cruel patience.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33685:“In your place, I would let her alone.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33691:“And to do. Is not her name Musichetta?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33700:produce effects with your knees. Buy a good pair of trousers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33701:double-milled cloth at Staub’s. That will assist.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33704:“At what price?” shouted Grantaire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33706:The third corner was delivered up to a poetical discussion. Pagan
tests/les_miserables.txt:33709:romanticism.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33711:Jean Prouvaire was timid only in repose. Once excited, he burst forth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33712:a sort of mirth accentuated his enthusiasm, and he was at once both
tests/les_miserables.txt:33713:laughing and lyric.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33717:dreams, you say. Well, even in nature, such as it is to-day, after the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33719:Such and such a mountain with the profile of a citadel, like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33721:not been proved to me that Pan does not come at night to breathe into
tests/les_miserables.txt:33724:with the cascade of Pissevache.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33727:In the last corner, they were talking politics. The Charter which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:33729:weakly. Courfeyrac was energetically making a breach in it. On the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33730:table lay an unfortunate copy of the famous Touquet Charter. Courfeyrac
tests/les_miserables.txt:33734:“In the first place, I won’t have any kings; if it were only from an
tests/les_miserables.txt:33735:economical point of view, I don’t want any; a king is a parasite. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:33737:the death of François I., the national debt of France amounted to an
tests/les_miserables.txt:33738:income of thirty thousand livres; at the death of Louis XIV. it was two
tests/les_miserables.txt:33739:milliards, six hundred millions, at twenty-eight livres the mark, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:33740:was equivalent in 1760, according to Desmarets, to four milliards, five
tests/les_miserables.txt:33741:hundred millions, which would to-day be equivalent to twelve milliards.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33742:In the second place, and no offence to Combeferre, a charter granted is
tests/les_miserables.txt:33743:but a poor expedient of civilization. To save the transition, to soften
tests/les_miserables.txt:33744:the passage, to deaden the shock, to cause the nation to pass
tests/les_miserables.txt:33745:insensibly from the monarchy to democracy by the practice of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33746:constitutional fictions,—what detestable reasons all those are! No! no!
tests/les_miserables.txt:33747:let us never enlighten the people with false daylight. Principles
tests/les_miserables.txt:33748:dwindle and pale in your constitutional cellar. No illegitimacy, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:33749:compromise, no grant from the king to the people. In all such grants
tests/les_miserables.txt:33750:there is an Article 14. By the side of the hand which gives there is
tests/les_miserables.txt:33751:the claw which snatches back. I refuse your charter point-blank. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:33752:charter is a mask; the lie lurks beneath it. A people which accepts a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33753:charter abdicates. The law is only the law when entire. No! no
tests/les_miserables.txt:33754:charter!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33757:It was winter; a couple of fagots were crackling in the fireplace. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:33758:was tempting, and Courfeyrac could not resist. He crumpled the poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:33760:flashed up. Combeferre watched the masterpiece of Louis XVIII. burn
tests/les_miserables.txt:33761:philosophically, and contented himself with saying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:33763:“The charter metamorphosed into flame.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33766:And sarcasms, sallies, jests, that French thing which is called
tests/les_miserables.txt:33767:_entrain_, and that English thing which is called humor, good and bad
tests/les_miserables.txt:33768:taste, good and bad reasons, all the wild pyrotechnics of dialogue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33769:mounting together and crossing from all points of the room, produced a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33778:The shocks of youthful minds among themselves have this admirable
tests/les_miserables.txt:33779:property, that one can never foresee the spark, nor divine the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33784:the first chance word. The spirit of each is sovereign, jest suffices
tests/les_miserables.txt:33785:to open the field to the unexpected. These are conversations with
tests/les_miserables.txt:33786:abrupt turns, in which the perspective changes suddenly. Chance is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33787:stage-manager of such conversations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33789:A severe thought, starting oddly from a clash of words, suddenly
tests/les_miserables.txt:33790:traversed the conflict of quips in which Grantaire, Bahorel, Prouvaire,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33791:Bossuet, Combeferre, and Courfeyrac were confusedly fencing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33793:How does a phrase crop up in a dialogue? Whence comes it that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:33796:the uproar, Bossuet all at once terminated some apostrophe to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33804:chin, and began to gaze fixedly at the audience.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33806:“Pardieu!” exclaimed Courfeyrac (“Parbleu” was falling into disuse at
tests/les_miserables.txt:33808:Bonaparte’s fatal number. Place Louis in front and Brumaire behind, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:33809:have the whole destiny of the man, with this significant peculiarity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33810:that the end treads close on the heels of the commencement.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33813:Enjolras, who had remained mute up to that point, broke the silence and
tests/les_miserables.txt:33816:“You mean to say, the crime and the expiation.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33819:This word _crime_ overpassed the measure of what Marius, who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:33820:already greatly agitated by the abrupt evocation of Waterloo, could
tests/les_miserables.txt:33821:accept.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33823:He rose, walked slowly to the map of France spread out on the wall, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:33824:at whose base an island was visible in a separate compartment, laid his
tests/les_miserables.txt:33825:finger on this compartment and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:33827:“Corsica, a little island which has rendered France very great.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33830:This was like a breath of icy air. All ceased talking. They felt that
tests/les_miserables.txt:33831:something was on the point of occurring.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33834:torso to which he was addicted. He gave it up to listen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33837:gazing at space, replied, without glancing at Marius:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:33839:“France needs no Corsica to be great. France is great because she is
tests/les_miserables.txt:33840:France. _Quia nomina leo_.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33844:voice burst forth with a vibration which came from a quiver of his very
tests/les_miserables.txt:33847:“God forbid that I should diminish France! But amalgamating Napoleon
tests/les_miserables.txt:33849:a newcomer among you, but I will confess that you amaze me. Where do we
tests/les_miserables.txt:33850:stand? Who are we? Who are you? Who am I? Let us come to an explanation
tests/les_miserables.txt:33851:about the Emperor. I hear you say _Buonaparte_, accenting the _u_ like
tests/les_miserables.txt:33857:everything. He was complete. He had in his brain the sum of human
tests/les_miserables.txt:33858:faculties. He made codes like Justinian, he dictated like Cæsar, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:33859:conversation was mingled with the lightning-flash of Pascal, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:33860:thunderclap of Tacitus, he made history and he wrote it, his bulletins
tests/les_miserables.txt:33861:are Iliads, he combined the cipher of Newton with the metaphor of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33863:at Tilsit he taught Emperors majesty, at the Academy of Sciences he
tests/les_miserables.txt:33864:replied to Laplace, in the Council of State he held his own against
tests/les_miserables.txt:33866:chicanery of the last, he was a legist with the attorneys and sidereal
tests/les_miserables.txt:33867:with the astronomers; like Cromwell blowing out one of two candles, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:33868:went to the Temple to bargain for a curtain tassel; he saw everything;
tests/les_miserables.txt:33869:he knew everything; which did not prevent him from laughing
tests/les_miserables.txt:33870:good-naturedly beside the cradle of his little child; and all at once,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33872:of artillery rumbled, pontoons stretched over the rivers, clouds of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33873:cavalry galloped in the storm, cries, trumpets, a trembling of thrones
tests/les_miserables.txt:33874:in every direction, the frontiers of kingdoms oscillated on the map,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33876:sheath; they beheld him, him, rise erect on the horizon with a blazing
tests/les_miserables.txt:33879:archangel of war!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33882:All held their peace, and Enjolras bowed his head. Silence always
tests/les_miserables.txt:33883:produces somewhat the effect of acquiescence, of the enemy being driven
tests/les_miserables.txt:33884:to the wall. Marius continued with increased enthusiasm, and almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:33888:the Empire of such an Emperor, when that nation is France and when it
tests/les_miserables.txt:33890:to march and to triumph, to have for halting-places all capitals, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33891:take his grenadiers and to make kings of them, to decree the falls of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33892:dynasties, and to transfigure Europe at the pace of a charge; to make
tests/les_miserables.txt:33896:announcement of a battle won, to have the cannon of the Invalides to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33898:words which flame forever, Marengo, Arcola, Austerlitz, Jena, Wagram!
tests/les_miserables.txt:33899:To cause constellations of victories to flash forth at each instant
tests/les_miserables.txt:33900:from the zenith of the centuries, to make the French Empire a pendant
tests/les_miserables.txt:33903:mountain sends out its eagles on all sides to conquer, to dominate, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33905:glory, to sound athwart the centuries a trumpet-blast of Titans, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33906:conquer the world twice, by conquest and by dazzling, that is sublime;
tests/les_miserables.txt:33912:Marius lowered his head in his turn; that cold and simple word had
tests/les_miserables.txt:33913:traversed his epic effusion like a blade of steel, and he felt it
tests/les_miserables.txt:33916:taken his departure, and all, with the exception of Enjolras, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:33919:ideas to some extent, did not consider himself beaten; there lingered
tests/les_miserables.txt:33920:in him a trace of inward fermentation which was on the point, no doubt,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33930:Reprends ton sceptre et ton char,
tests/les_miserables.txt:33935:The wild and tender accents with which Combeferre sang communicated to
tests/les_miserables.txt:33936:this couplet a sort of strange grandeur. Marius, thoughtfully, and with
tests/les_miserables.txt:33937:his eyes diked on the ceiling, repeated almost mechanically: “My
tests/les_miserables.txt:33943:“Citizen,” said Enjolras to him, “my mother is the Republic.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33952:That evening left Marius profoundly shaken, and with a melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:33958:Marius was gloomy. He had but just acquired a faith; must he then
tests/les_miserables.txt:33959:reject it already? He affirmed to himself that he would not. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:33960:declared to himself that he would not doubt, and he began to doubt in
tests/les_miserables.txt:33961:spite of himself. To stand between two religions, from one of which you
tests/les_miserables.txt:33962:have not as yet emerged, and another into which you have not yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:33964:souls. Marius was clear-eyed, and he required the true light. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:33966:remain where he was, he could not halt there, he was irresistibly
tests/les_miserables.txt:33967:constrained to continue, to advance, to examine, to think, to march
tests/les_miserables.txt:33969:many steps which had brought him nearer to his father, to now take a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33970:step which should estrange him from that father. His discomfort was
tests/les_miserables.txt:33971:augmented by all the reflections which occurred to him. An escarpment
tests/les_miserables.txt:33972:rose around him. He was in accord neither with his grandfather nor with
tests/les_miserables.txt:33974:the eyes of the others, and he recognized the fact that he was doubly
tests/les_miserables.txt:33975:isolated, on the side of age and on the side of youth. He ceased to go
tests/les_miserables.txt:33978:In the troubled state of his conscience, he no longer thought of
tests/les_miserables.txt:33979:certain serious sides of existence. The realities of life do not allow
tests/les_miserables.txt:33985:“Monsieur Courfeyrac answered for you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:33994:“Request Courfeyrac to come and talk with me,” said Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:33996:Courfeyrac having made his appearance, the host left them. Marius then
tests/les_miserables.txt:33997:told him what it had not before occurred to him to relate, that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:34000:“What is to become of you?” said Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34013:“Fifteen francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34022:“Have you clothes?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34031:“A watch.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34040:“I know a clothes-dealer who will take your frock-coat and a pair of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34047:“You will then have only a pair of trousers, a waistcoat, a hat and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34048:coat.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34054:“What! you will not go barefoot? What opulence!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34060:“I know a watchmaker who will buy your watch.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34069:“Whatever is necessary. Anything honest, that is to say.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34084:“So much the worse.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34090:“Because one of my friends, a publisher, is getting up a sort of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:34091:encyclopædia, for which you might have translated English or German
tests/les_miserables.txt:34092:articles. It is badly paid work, but one can live by it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34101:“In the meanwhile I will live on my clothes and my watch.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34104:The clothes-dealer was sent for. He paid twenty francs for the cast-off
tests/les_miserables.txt:34105:garments. They went to the watchmaker’s. He bought the watch for
tests/les_miserables.txt:34106:forty-five francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34108:“That is not bad,” said Marius to Courfeyrac, on their return to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34109:hotel, “with my fifteen francs, that makes eighty.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34112:“And the hotel bill?” observed Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34116:The landlord presented his bill, which had to be paid on the spot. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:34117:amounted to seventy francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34119:“I have ten francs left,” said Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34121:“The deuce,” exclaimed Courfeyrac, “you will eat up five francs while
tests/les_miserables.txt:34127:bottom in difficulties, had finally hunted up Marius’ abode.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34129:One morning, on his return from the law-school, Marius found a letter
tests/les_miserables.txt:34131:francs in gold, in a sealed box.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34133:Marius sent back the thirty louis to his aunt, with a respectful
tests/les_miserables.txt:34134:letter, in which he stated that he had sufficient means of subsistence
tests/les_miserables.txt:34135:and that he should be able thenceforth to supply all his needs. At that
tests/les_miserables.txt:34136:moment, he had three francs left.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34143:Marius left the hotel de la Porte Saint-Jacques, as he did not wish to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34159:[Illustration: Excellence of Misfortune]
tests/les_miserables.txt:34162:Life became hard for Marius. It was nothing to eat his clothes and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34163:watch. He ate of that terrible, inexpressible thing that is called _de
tests/les_miserables.txt:34164:la vache enragé_; that is to say, he endured great hardships and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34165:privations. A terrible thing it is, containing days without bread,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34166:nights without sleep, evenings without a candle, a hearth without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34167:fire, weeks without work, a future without hope, a coat out at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34168:elbows, an old hat which evokes the laughter of young girls, a door
tests/les_miserables.txt:34169:which one finds locked on one at night because one’s rent is not paid,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34170:the insolence of the porter and the cook-shop man, the sneers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34172:accepted, disgusts, bitterness, despondency. Marius learned how all
tests/les_miserables.txt:34173:this is eaten, and how such are often the only things which one has to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34174:devour. At that moment of his existence when a man needs his pride,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34175:because he needs love, he felt that he was jeered at because he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:34176:badly dressed, and ridiculous because he was poor. At the age when
tests/les_miserables.txt:34178:than once on his dilapidated boots, and he knew the unjust shame and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34179:the poignant blushes of wretchedness. Admirable and terrible trial from
tests/les_miserables.txt:34180:which the feeble emerge base, from which the strong emerge sublime. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:34181:crucible into which destiny casts a man, whenever it desires a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34182:scoundrel or a demi-god.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34184:For many great deeds are performed in petty combats. There are
tests/les_miserables.txt:34185:instances of bravery ignored and obstinate, which defend themselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:34186:step by step in that fatal onslaught of necessities and turpitudes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34187:Noble and mysterious triumphs which no eye beholds, which are requited
tests/les_miserables.txt:34188:with no renown, which are saluted with no trumpet blast. Life,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34190:which have their heroes; obscure heroes, who are, sometimes, grander
tests/les_miserables.txt:34193:Firm and rare natures are thus created; misery, almost always a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34198:There came a moment in Marius’ life, when he swept his own landing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34199:when he bought his sou’s worth of Brie cheese at the fruiterer’s, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:34201:purchase a loaf, which he carried off furtively to his attic as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:34202:he had stolen it. Sometimes there could be seen gliding into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34203:butcher’s shop on the corner, in the midst of the bantering cooks who
tests/les_miserables.txt:34204:elbowed him, an awkward young man, carrying big books under his arm,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34207:butcher’s astonished wife, asked for a mutton cutlet, paid six or seven
tests/les_miserables.txt:34209:two books, and went away. It was Marius. On this cutlet, which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:34210:cooked for himself, he lived for three days.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34212:On the first day he ate the meat, on the second he ate the fat, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34215:every occasion, saying that he needed nothing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34217:He was still in mourning for his father when the revolution which we
tests/les_miserables.txt:34218:have just described was effected within him. From that time forth, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:34219:had not put off his black garments. But his garments were quitting him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34220:The day came when he had no longer a coat. The trousers would go next.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34221:What was to be done? Courfeyrac, to whom he had, on his side, done some
tests/les_miserables.txt:34222:good turns, gave him an old coat. For thirty sous, Marius got it turned
tests/les_miserables.txt:34223:by some porter or other, and it was a new coat. But this coat was
tests/les_miserables.txt:34224:green. Then Marius ceased to go out until after nightfall. This made
tests/les_miserables.txt:34225:his coat black. As he wished always to appear in mourning, he clothed
tests/les_miserables.txt:34228:In spite of all this, he got admitted to practice as a lawyer. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:34229:supposed to live in Courfeyrac’s room, which was decent, and where a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34230:certain number of law-books backed up and completed by several
tests/les_miserables.txt:34231:dilapidated volumes of romance, passed as the library required by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34232:regulations. He had his letters addressed to Courfeyrac’s quarters.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34234:When Marius became a lawyer, he informed his grandfather of the fact in
tests/les_miserables.txt:34235:a letter which was cold but full of submission and respect. M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34237:pieces, and threw it into the waste-basket. Two or three days later,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34241:fool, you would know that one cannot be a baron and a lawyer at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34251:It is the same with wretchedness as with everything else. It ends by
tests/les_miserables.txt:34252:becoming bearable. It finally assumes a form, and adjusts itself. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:34253:vegetates, that is to say, one develops in a certain meagre fashion,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34254:which is, however, sufficient for life. This is the mode in which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34255:existence of Marius Pontmercy was arranged:
tests/les_miserables.txt:34258:little in front of him. By dint of toil, perseverance, courage, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34259:will, he had managed to draw from his work about seven hundred francs a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34260:year. He had learned German and English; thanks to Courfeyrac, who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34261:put him in communication with his friend the publisher, Marius filled
tests/les_miserables.txt:34263:house. He drew up prospectuses, translated newspapers, annotated
tests/les_miserables.txt:34264:editions, compiled biographies, etc.; net product, year in and year
tests/les_miserables.txt:34265:out, seven hundred francs. He lived on it. How? Not so badly. We will
tests/les_miserables.txt:34268:Marius occupied in the Gorbeau house, for an annual sum of thirty
tests/les_miserables.txt:34269:francs, a den minus a fireplace, called a cabinet, which contained only
tests/les_miserables.txt:34270:the most indispensable articles of furniture. This furniture belonged
tests/les_miserables.txt:34271:to him. He gave three francs a month to the old _principal tenant_ to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34272:come and sweep his hole, and to bring him a little hot water every
tests/les_miserables.txt:34274:roll. His breakfast varied in cost from two to four sous, according as
tests/les_miserables.txt:34275:eggs were dear or cheap. At six o’clock in the evening he descended the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34276:Rue Saint-Jacques to dine at Rousseau’s, opposite Basset’s, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34277:stamp-dealer’s, on the corner of the Rue des Mathurins. He ate no soup.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34279:sous, and a three-sou dessert. For three sous he got as much bread as
tests/les_miserables.txt:34281:Madam Rousseau, at that period still plump and rosy majestically
tests/les_miserables.txt:34286:carafes were emptied, was a calming potion rather than a restaurant. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:34287:no longer exists. The proprietor had a fine nickname: he was called
tests/les_miserables.txt:34288:_Rousseau the Aquatic_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34290:Thus, breakfast four sous, dinner sixteen sous; his food cost him
tests/les_miserables.txt:34291:twenty sous a day; which made three hundred and sixty-five francs a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34292:year. Add the thirty francs for rent, and the thirty-six francs to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34294:francs, Marius was fed, lodged, and waited on. His clothing cost him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34295:hundred francs, his linen fifty francs, his washing fifty francs; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34296:whole did not exceed six hundred and fifty francs. He was rich. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:34297:sometimes lent ten francs to a friend. Courfeyrac had once been able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34298:borrow sixty francs of him. As far as fire was concerned, as Marius had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34299:no fireplace, he had “simplified matters.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34302:Marius always had two complete suits of clothes, the one old, “for
tests/les_miserables.txt:34303:every day”; the other, brand new for special occasions. Both were
tests/les_miserables.txt:34304:black. He had but three shirts, one on his person, the second in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34305:commode, and the third in the washerwoman’s hands. He renewed them as
tests/les_miserables.txt:34306:they wore out. They were always ragged, which caused him to button his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34307:coat to the chin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34310:condition. Hard years; difficult, some of them, to traverse, others to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34311:climb. Marius had not failed for a single day. He had endured
tests/les_miserables.txt:34312:everything in the way of destitution; he had done everything except
tests/les_miserables.txt:34313:contract debts. He did himself the justice to say that he had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:34315:even said to himself, that a creditor is worse than a master; for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34316:master possesses only your person, a creditor possesses your dignity
tests/les_miserables.txt:34317:and can administer to it a box on the ear. Rather than borrow, he went
tests/les_miserables.txt:34320:may lead to baseness of soul, he kept a jealous watch on his pride.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34321:Such and such a formality or action, which, in any other situation
tests/les_miserables.txt:34322:would have appeared merely a deference to him, now seemed insipidity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34323:and he nerved himself against it. His face wore a sort of severe flush.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34326:During all these trials he had felt himself encouraged and even
tests/les_miserables.txt:34327:uplifted, at times, by a secret force that he possessed within himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34328:The soul aids the body, and at certain moments, raises it. It is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34329:only bird which bears up its own cage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34332:the name of Thénardier. Marius, with his grave and enthusiastic nature,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34335:colonel amid the bullets and the cannon-balls of Waterloo. He never
tests/les_miserables.txt:34337:associated them in his veneration. It was a sort of worship in two
tests/les_miserables.txt:34338:steps, with the grand altar for the colonel and the lesser one for
tests/les_miserables.txt:34340:Thénardier, was the idea of the distress into which he knew that
tests/les_miserables.txt:34341:Thénardier had fallen, and which had engulfed the latter. Marius had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34342:learned at Montfermeil of the ruin and bankruptcy of the unfortunate
tests/les_miserables.txt:34343:inn-keeper. Since that time, he had made unheard-of efforts to find
tests/les_miserables.txt:34344:traces of him and to reach him in that dark abyss of misery in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:34345:Thénardier had disappeared. Marius had beaten the whole country; he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34348:money which he had laid by. No one had been able to give him any news
tests/les_miserables.txt:34349:of Thénardier: he was supposed to have gone abroad. His creditors had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34350:also sought him, with less love than Marius, but with as much
tests/les_miserables.txt:34352:blamed himself, and was almost angry with himself for his lack of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34353:success in his researches. It was the only debt left him by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34354:colonel, and Marius made it a matter of honor to pay it. “What,” he
tests/les_miserables.txt:34356:Thénardier contrive to find him amid the smoke and the grape-shot, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34358:owe so much to Thénardier, cannot join him in this shadow where he is
tests/les_miserables.txt:34359:lying in the pangs of death, and in my turn bring him back from death
tests/les_miserables.txt:34360:to life! Oh! I will find him!” To find Thénardier, in fact, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:34361:would have given one of his arms, to rescue him from his misery, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:34362:would have sacrificed all his blood. To see Thénardier, to render
tests/les_miserables.txt:34363:Thénardier some service, to say to him: “You do not know me; well, I do
tests/les_miserables.txt:34365:magnificent dream.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34373:At this epoch, Marius was twenty years of age. It was three years since
tests/les_miserables.txt:34375:terms, without attempting to approach each other, and without seeking
tests/les_miserables.txt:34376:to see each other. Besides, what was the use of seeing each other?
tests/les_miserables.txt:34381:crusty, harsh, and smiling old fellow who cursed, shouted, and stormed
tests/les_miserables.txt:34382:and brandished his cane, cherished for him, at the most, only that
tests/les_miserables.txt:34383:affection, which is at once slight and severe, of the dotards of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34384:comedy. Marius was in error. There are fathers who do not love their
tests/les_miserables.txt:34385:children; there exists no grandfather who does not adore his grandson.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34387:idolized him after his own fashion, with an accompaniment of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34388:snappishness and boxes on the ear; but, this child once gone, he felt a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34389:black void in his heart; he would allow no one to mention the child to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34390:him, and all the while secretly regretted that he was so well obeyed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34391:At first, he hoped that this Buonapartist, this Jacobin, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:34394:did not make his appearance. “I could not do otherwise than turn him
tests/les_miserables.txt:34397:answered “yes,” but his aged head, which he shook in silence, replied
tests/les_miserables.txt:34399:need affection as they need the sun. It is warmth. Strong as his nature
tests/les_miserables.txt:34400:was, the absence of Marius had wrought some change in him. Nothing in
tests/les_miserables.txt:34401:the world could have induced him to take a step towards “that rogue”;
tests/les_miserables.txt:34403:incessantly. He lived in the Marais in a more and more retired manner;
tests/les_miserables.txt:34405:convulsive harshness, and his violences always terminated in a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34406:gentle and gloomy dejection. He sometimes said: “Oh! if he only would
tests/les_miserables.txt:34410:As for his aunt, she thought too little to love much; Marius was no
tests/les_miserables.txt:34411:longer for her much more than a vague black form; and she eventually
tests/les_miserables.txt:34412:came to occupy herself with him much less than with the cat or the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34413:paroquet which she probably had. What augmented Father Gillenormand’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:34414:secret suffering was, that he locked it all up within his breast, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34415:did not allow its existence to be divined. His sorrow was like those
tests/les_miserables.txt:34416:recently invented furnaces which consume their own smoke. It sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:34417:happened that officious busybodies spoke to him of Marius, and asked
tests/les_miserables.txt:34418:him: “What is your grandson doing?” “What has become of him?” The old
tests/les_miserables.txt:34419:bourgeois replied with a sigh, that he was a sad case, and giving a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34420:fillip to his cuff, if he wished to appear gay: “Monsieur le Baron de
tests/les_miserables.txt:34421:Pontmercy is practising pettifogging in some corner or other.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34424:While the old man regretted, Marius applauded himself. As is the case
tests/les_miserables.txt:34425:with all good-hearted people, misfortune had eradicated his bitterness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34427:his mind on not receiving anything more from the man who _had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:34432:_it was certainly the least he could do_; that it was an
tests/les_miserables.txt:34434:in some other way and later on for his impious indifference towards his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34435:father, and such a father! that it would not have been just that his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34437:any case, what were his toils and his destitution compared with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34438:colonel’s heroic life? that, in short, the only way for him to approach
tests/les_miserables.txt:34439:his father and resemble him, was to be brave in the face of indigence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34441:doubt, what the colonel had meant to imply by the words: “He will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:34442:worthy of it.” Words which Marius continued to wear, not on his breast,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34443:since the colonel’s writing had disappeared, but in his heart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34446:he had been only a child, now he was a man. He felt it. Misery, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:34447:repeat, had been good for him. Poverty in youth, when it succeeds, has
tests/les_miserables.txt:34448:this magnificent property about it, that it turns the whole will
tests/les_miserables.txt:34450:instantly lays material life bare and renders it hideous; hence
tests/les_miserables.txt:34452:a hundred coarse and brilliant distractions, horse races, hunting,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34453:dogs, tobacco, gaming, good repasts, and all the rest of it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:34454:occupations for the baser side of the soul, at the expense of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34455:loftier and more delicate sides. The poor young man wins his bread with
tests/les_miserables.txt:34456:difficulty; he eats; when he has eaten, he has nothing more but
tests/les_miserables.txt:34457:meditation. He goes to the spectacles which God furnishes gratis; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:34458:gazes at the sky, space, the stars, flowers, children, the humanity
tests/les_miserables.txt:34459:among which he is suffering, the creation amid which he beams. He gazes
tests/les_miserables.txt:34460:so much on humanity that he perceives its soul, he gazes upon creation
tests/les_miserables.txt:34461:to such an extent that he beholds God. He dreams, he feels himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:34463:man who suffers he passes to the compassion of the man who meditates.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34465:pity for all. As he thinks of the innumerable enjoyments which nature
tests/les_miserables.txt:34466:offers, gives, and lavishes to souls which stand open, and refuses to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34467:souls that are closed, he comes to pity, he the millionnaire of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34470:misery of a young man is never miserable. The first young lad who comes
tests/les_miserables.txt:34472:rapid walk, his brilliant eyes, his warmly circulating blood, his black
tests/les_miserables.txt:34476:earn his bread, his dorsal column gains pride, his brain gathers ideas.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34477:His task finished, he returns to ineffable ecstasies, to contemplation,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34478:to joys; he beholds his feet set in afflictions, in obstacles, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34480:He is firm, serene, gentle, peaceful, attentive, serious, content with
tests/les_miserables.txt:34482:forms of riches which many a rich man lacks: work, which makes him
tests/les_miserables.txt:34483:free; and thought, which makes him dignified.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34485:This is what had happened with Marius. To tell the truth, he inclined a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34486:little too much to the side of contemplation. From the day when he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34487:succeeded in earning his living with some approach to certainty, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34488:stopped, thinking it good to be poor, and retrenching time from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34491:voluptuousness of ecstasy and inward radiance. He had thus propounded
tests/les_miserables.txt:34493:labor, in order to toil as much as possible at the labor which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:34495:cast the rest to the infinite. As he believed that he lacked nothing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34496:he did not perceive that contemplation, thus understood, ends by
tests/les_miserables.txt:34497:becoming one of the forms of idleness; that he was contenting himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:34498:with conquering the first necessities of life, and that he was resting
tests/les_miserables.txt:34501:It was evident that, for this energetic and enthusiastic nature, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:34502:could only be a transitory state, and that, at the first shock against
tests/les_miserables.txt:34503:the inevitable complications of destiny, Marius would awaken.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34506:Gillenormand thought about the matter, he was not practising, he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:34508:To haunt attorneys, to follow the court, to hunt up cases—what a bore!
tests/les_miserables.txt:34509:Why should he do it? He saw no reason for changing the manner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34510:gaining his livelihood! The obscure and ill-paid publishing
tests/les_miserables.txt:34511:establishment had come to mean for him a sure source of work which did
tests/les_miserables.txt:34512:not involve too much labor, as we have explained, and which sufficed
tests/les_miserables.txt:34517:regular occupation, and to give him fifteen hundred francs a year. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:34518:be well lodged! Fifteen hundred francs! No doubt. But renounce his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34519:liberty! Be on fixed wages! A sort of hired man of letters! According
tests/les_miserables.txt:34520:to Marius’ opinion, if he accepted, his position would become both
tests/les_miserables.txt:34521:better and worse at the same time, he acquired comfort, and lost his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34522:dignity; it was a fine and complete unhappiness converted into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34523:repulsive and ridiculous state of torture: something like the case of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34524:blind man who should recover the sight of one eye. He refused.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34527:everything, and through having been too much alarmed, he had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:34528:entered decidedly into the group presided over by Enjolras. They had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34529:remained good friends; they were ready to assist each other on occasion
tests/les_miserables.txt:34531:young, Courfeyrac; and one old, M. Mabeuf. He inclined more to the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:34532:man. In the first place, he owed to him the revolution which had taken
tests/les_miserables.txt:34533:place within him; to him he was indebted for having known and loved his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34534:father. “He operated on me for a cataract,” he said.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34536:The churchwarden had certainly played a decisive part.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34538:It was not, however, that M. Mabeuf had been anything but the calm and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34539:impassive agent of Providence in this connection. He had enlightened
tests/les_miserables.txt:34540:Marius by chance and without being aware of the fact, as does a candle
tests/les_miserables.txt:34541:which some one brings; he had been the candle and not the some one.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34543:As for Marius’ inward political revolution, M. Mabeuf was totally
tests/les_miserables.txt:34544:incapable of comprehending it, of willing or of directing it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34556:political opinions,” he expressed the real state of his mind. All
tests/les_miserables.txt:34557:political opinions were matters of indifference to him, and he approved
tests/les_miserables.txt:34558:them all, without distinction, provided they left him in peace, as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34559:Greeks called the Furies “the beautiful, the good, the charming,” the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34560:Eumenides. M. Mabeuf’s political opinion consisted in a passionate love
tests/les_miserables.txt:34562:he possessed the termination in _ist_, without which no one could exist
tests/les_miserables.txt:34564:an Orleanist, nor an Anarchist; he was a _bouquinist_, a collector of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34565:old books. He did not understand how men could busy themselves with
tests/les_miserables.txt:34566:hating each other because of silly stuff like the charter, democracy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34567:legitimacy, monarchy, the republic, etc., when there were in the world
tests/les_miserables.txt:34568:all sorts of mosses, grasses, and shrubs which they might be looking
tests/les_miserables.txt:34569:at, and heaps of folios, and even of 32mos, which they might turn over.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34570:He took good care not to become useless; having books did not prevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:34572:When he made Pontmercy’s acquaintance, this sympathy had existed
tests/les_miserables.txt:34573:between the colonel and himself—that what the colonel did for flowers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34574:he did for fruits. M. Mabeuf had succeeded in producing seedling pears
tests/les_miserables.txt:34576:combinations, apparently, that the October Mirabelle, now celebrated
tests/les_miserables.txt:34578:went to mass rather from gentleness than from piety, and because, as he
tests/les_miserables.txt:34579:loved the faces of men, but hated their noise, he found them assembled
tests/les_miserables.txt:34580:and silent only in church. Feeling that he must be something in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34581:State, he had chosen the career of warden. However, he had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:34582:succeeded in loving any woman as much as a tulip bulb, nor any man as
tests/les_miserables.txt:34583:much as an Elzevir. He had long passed sixty, when, one day, some one
tests/les_miserables.txt:34586:say: “Oh! if I were only rich!” it was not when ogling a pretty girl,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34587:as was the case with Father Gillenormand, but when contemplating an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:34590:lay crooked up in the folds of his sheets. He had composed and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34591:published a _Flora of the Environs of Cauteretz_, with colored plates,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34592:a work which enjoyed a tolerable measure of esteem and which sold well.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34594:ask for it. He drew as much as two thousand francs a year from it; this
tests/les_miserables.txt:34595:constituted nearly the whole of his fortune. Although poor, he had had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34596:the talent to form for himself, by dint of patience, privations, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34597:time, a precious collection of rare copies of every sort. He never went
tests/les_miserables.txt:34599:sole decoration of the four rooms on the ground floor, which composed
tests/les_miserables.txt:34600:his lodgings, consisted of framed herbariums, and engravings of the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:34601:masters. The sight of a sword or a gun chilled his blood. He had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:34602:approached a cannon in his life, even at the Invalides. He had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34603:passable stomach, a brother who was a curé, perfectly white hair, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:34605:Picard accent, an infantile laugh, the air of an old sheep, and he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:34607:other acquaintance among the living, than an old bookseller of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34608:Porte-Saint-Jacques, named Royal. His dream was to naturalize indigo in
tests/les_miserables.txt:34609:France.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34611:His servant was also a sort of innocent. The poor good old woman was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34612:spinster. Sultan, her cat, which might have mewed Allegri’s miserere in
tests/les_miserables.txt:34613:the Sixtine Chapel, had filled her heart and sufficed for the quantity
tests/les_miserables.txt:34614:of passion which existed in her. None of her dreams had ever proceeded
tests/les_miserables.txt:34615:as far as man. She had never been able to get further than her cat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34616:Like him, she had a moustache. Her glory consisted in her caps, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:34618:counting over the linen in her chest, and in spreading out on her bed
tests/les_miserables.txt:34619:the dresses in the piece which she bought and never had made up. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:34620:knew how to read. M. Mabeuf had nicknamed her Mother Plutarque.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34622:M. Mabeuf had taken a fancy to Marius, because Marius, being young and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34623:gentle, warmed his age without startling his timidity. Youth combined
tests/les_miserables.txt:34624:with gentleness produces on old people the effect of the sun without
tests/les_miserables.txt:34626:with marches and countermarches, and with all those prodigious battles
tests/les_miserables.txt:34627:in which his father had given and received such tremendous blows of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34631:His brother the curé died about 1830, and almost immediately, as when
tests/les_miserables.txt:34633:notary’s failure deprived him of the sum of ten thousand francs, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:34635:Revolution of July brought a crisis to publishing. In a period of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34636:embarrassment, the first thing which does not sell is a _Flora. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:34638:without a single purchaser. Sometimes M. Mabeuf started at the sound of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34640:water-carrier.” In short, one day, M. Mabeuf quitted the Rue Mésières,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34641:abdicated the functions of warden, gave up Saint-Sulpice, sold not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34642:part of his books, but of his prints,—that to which he was the least
tests/les_miserables.txt:34643:attached,—and installed himself in a little house on the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:34645:reasons: in the first place, the ground floor and the garden cost three
tests/les_miserables.txt:34646:hundred francs, and he dared not spend more than two hundred francs on
tests/les_miserables.txt:34647:his rent; in the second, being near Faton’s shooting-gallery, he could
tests/les_miserables.txt:34648:hear the pistol-shots; which was intolerable to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34650:He carried off his _Flora_, his copper-plates, his herbariums, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34652:Salpêtrière, in a sort of thatched cottage of the village of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34653:Austerlitz, where, for fifty crowns a year, he got three rooms and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34654:garden enclosed by a hedge, and containing a well. He took advantage of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34656:entrance into his new quarters, he was very gay, and drove the nails on
tests/les_miserables.txt:34657:which his engravings and herbariums were to hang, with his own hands,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34658:dug in his garden the rest of the day, and at night, perceiving that
tests/les_miserables.txt:34659:Mother Plutarque had a melancholy air, and was very thoughtful, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:34664:Only two visitors, the bookseller of the Porte-Saint-Jacques and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34665:Marius, were admitted to view the thatched cottage at Austerlitz, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34666:brawling name which was, to tell the truth, extremely disagreeable to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34669:However, as we have just pointed out, brains which are absorbed in some
tests/les_miserables.txt:34670:bit of wisdom, or folly, or, as it often happens, in both at once, are
tests/les_miserables.txt:34671:but slowly accessible to the things of actual life. Their own destiny
tests/les_miserables.txt:34672:is a far-off thing to them. There results from such concentration a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34673:passivity, which, if it were the outcome of reasoning, would resemble
tests/les_miserables.txt:34674:philosophy. One declines, descends, trickles away, even crumbles away,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34675:and yet is hardly conscious of it one’s self. It always ends, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:34677:seems as though we held ourselves neutral in the game which is going on
tests/les_miserables.txt:34679:look on at the game with indifference.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34681:It is thus that, athwart the cloud which formed about him, when all his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34684:swing of a pendulum. Once mounted on an illusion, he went for a very
tests/les_miserables.txt:34685:long time, even after the illusion had disappeared. A clock does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:34686:stop short at the precise moment when the key is lost.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34688:M. Mabeuf had his innocent pleasures. These pleasures were inexpensive
tests/les_miserables.txt:34689:and unexpected; the merest chance furnished them. One day, Mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:34690:Plutarque was reading a romance in one corner of the room. She was
tests/les_miserables.txt:34693:read very loud, and who have the appearance of giving themselves their
tests/les_miserables.txt:34697:romance which she had in hand. M. Mabeuf heard her without listening to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34700:In the course of her reading, Mother Plutarque came to this phrase. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:34701:was a question of an officer of dragoons and a beauty:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:34708:“Bouddha and the Dragon,” struck in M. Mabeuf in a low voice. “Yes, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:34709:is true that there was a dragon, which, from the depths of its cave,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34711:had already been consumed by this monster, which, besides, had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34712:claws of a tiger. Bouddha went into its den and succeeded in converting
tests/les_miserables.txt:34714:There is no more beautiful legend in existence.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34717:And M. Mabeuf fell into a delicious reverie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34725:Marius liked this candid old man who saw himself gradually falling into
tests/les_miserables.txt:34726:the clutches of indigence, and who came to feel astonishment, little by
tests/les_miserables.txt:34727:little, without, however, being made melancholy by it. Marius met
tests/les_miserables.txt:34728:Courfeyrac and sought out M. Mabeuf. Very rarely, however; twice a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34731:Marius’ pleasure consisted in taking long walks alone on the outer
tests/les_miserables.txt:34734:garden, the beds of lettuce, the chickens on the dung-heap, the horse
tests/les_miserables.txt:34736:some of them thought his attire suspicious and his mien sinister. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:34737:was only a poor young man dreaming in an objectless way.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34740:house, and, tempted by its isolation and its cheapness, had taken up
tests/les_miserables.txt:34743:Some of his father’s old generals or old comrades had invited him to go
tests/les_miserables.txt:34747:to General Fririon, to the Invalides. There was music and dancing
tests/les_miserables.txt:34748:there. On such evenings, Marius put on his new coat. But he never went
tests/les_miserables.txt:34749:to these evening parties or balls except on days when it was freezing
tests/les_miserables.txt:34750:cold, because he could not afford a carriage, and he did not wish to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34754:drawing-room you may be soiled everywhere except on your shoes. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:34755:order to insure a good reception there, only one irreproachable thing
tests/les_miserables.txt:34756:is asked of you; your conscience? No, your boots.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34759:All passions except those of the heart are dissipated by reverie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34760:Marius’ political fevers vanished thus. The Revolution of 1830 assisted
tests/les_miserables.txt:34761:in the process, by satisfying and calming him. He remained the same,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34763:they had been tempered. To speak accurately, he had no longer any
tests/les_miserables.txt:34765:of humanity. Out of humanity he chose France; out of the Nation he
tests/les_miserables.txt:34766:chose the people; out of the people he chose the woman. It was to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:34767:point above all, that his pity was directed. Now he preferred an idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:34770:he returned in the evening through the boulevards, and caught a glimpse
tests/les_miserables.txt:34771:through the branches of the trees of the fathomless space beyond, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34772:nameless gleams, the abyss, the shadow, the mystery, all that which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:34775:He thought that he had, and he really had, in fact, arrived at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34777:nothing but heaven, the only thing which Truth can perceive from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34780:This did not prevent him from multiplying his plans, his combinations,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34781:his scaffoldings, his projects for the future. In this state of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34782:reverie, an eye which could have cast a glance into Marius’ interior
tests/les_miserables.txt:34783:would have been dazzled with the purity of that soul. In fact, had it
tests/les_miserables.txt:34784:been given to our eyes of the flesh to gaze into the consciences of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34785:others, we should be able to judge a man much more surely according to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34786:what he dreams, than according to what he thinks. There is will in
tests/les_miserables.txt:34787:thought, there is none in dreams. Reverie, which is utterly
tests/les_miserables.txt:34788:spontaneous, takes and keeps, even in the gigantic and the ideal, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34789:form of our spirit. Nothing proceeds more directly and more sincerely
tests/les_miserables.txt:34792:much more than in deliberate, rational co-ordinated ideas, is the real
tests/les_miserables.txt:34793:character of a man to be found. Our chimæras are the things which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34794:most resemble us. Each one of us dreams of the unknown and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34795:impossible in accordance with his nature.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34798:Marius told him that his neighbors, the wretched Jondrette family, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34804:“Because they do not pay their rent; they owe for two quarters.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34807:“How much is it?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34810:“Twenty francs,” said the old woman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34812:Marius had thirty francs saved up in a drawer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34814:“Here,” he said to the old woman, “take these twenty-five francs. Pay
tests/les_miserables.txt:34815:for the poor people and give them five francs, and do not tell them
tests/les_miserables.txt:34825:It chanced that the regiment to which Lieutenant Théodule belonged came
tests/les_miserables.txt:34827:a second idea. She had, on the first occasion, hit upon the plan of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34829:take Marius’ place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34831:At all events and in case the grandfather should feel the vague need of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34832:a young face in the house,—these rays of dawn are sometimes sweet to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34834:erratum,” she thought, “such as one sees in books. For Marius, read
tests/les_miserables.txt:34839:one takes a lancer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34843:voice; for the question concerned her favorite:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:34845:“Father, Théodule is coming to present his respects to you this
tests/les_miserables.txt:34857:Then he went back to his reading, thought no more of his grandnephew,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34858:who was merely some Théodule or other, and soon flew into a rage, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:34859:almost always happened when he read. The “sheet” which he held,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34860:although Royalist, of course, announced for the following day, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:34861:any softening phrases, one of these little events which were of daily
tests/les_miserables.txt:34862:occurrence at that date in Paris: “That the students of the schools of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34863:law and medicine were to assemble on the Place du Panthéon, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:34864:midday,—to deliberate.” The discussion concerned one of the questions
tests/les_miserables.txt:34865:of the moment, the artillery of the National Guard, and a conflict
tests/les_miserables.txt:34866:between the Minister of War and “the citizen’s militia,” on the subject
tests/les_miserables.txt:34867:of the cannon parked in the courtyard of the Louvre. The students were
tests/les_miserables.txt:34868:to “deliberate” over this. It did not take much more than this to swell
tests/les_miserables.txt:34872:the rest, to “deliberate, at midday, on the Place du Panthéon.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34876:clad in plain clothes as a bourgeois, which was clever of him, and was
tests/les_miserables.txt:34877:discreetly introduced by Mademoiselle Gillenormand. The lancer had
tests/les_miserables.txt:34879:life pension. It is well to disguise one’s self as a civilian from time
tests/les_miserables.txt:34888:And in a low voice to the lieutenant:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:34895:The lieutenant, who was but little accustomed to such venerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:34896:encounters, stammered with some timidity: “Good day, uncle,”—and made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34897:salute composed of the involuntary and mechanical outline of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34902:That said, he totally forgot the lancer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34906:M. Gillenormand began to pace back and forth, his hands in his pockets,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34907:talking aloud, and twitching, with his irritated old fingers, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34908:two watches which he wore in his two fobs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34910:“That pack of brats! they convene on the Place du Panthéon! by my life!
tests/les_miserables.txt:34911:urchins who were with their nurses but yesterday! If one were to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34913:to-morrow, at midday. What are we coming to? What are we coming to? It
tests/les_miserables.txt:34914:is clear that we are making for the abyss. That is what the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34915:_descamisados_ have brought us to! To deliberate on the citizen
tests/les_miserables.txt:34918:Jacobinism leads. I will bet anything you like, a million against a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34919:counter, that there will be no one there but returned convicts and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34920:released galley-slaves. The Republicans and the galley-slaves,—they
tests/les_miserables.txt:34921:form but one nose and one handkerchief. Carnot used to say: ‘Where
tests/les_miserables.txt:34922:would you have me go, traitor?’ Fouché replied: ‘Wherever you please,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34923:imbecile!’ That’s what the Republicans are like.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34930:“When one reflects that that scoundrel was so vile as to turn
tests/les_miserables.txt:34931:carbonaro! Why did you leave my house? To go and become a Republican!
tests/les_miserables.txt:34932:Pssst! In the first place, the people want none of your republic, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:34933:have common sense, they know well that there always have been kings,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34935:the people, after all, they make sport of it, of your republic—do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:34936:understand, idiot? Is it not a horrible caprice? To fall in love with
tests/les_miserables.txt:34937:Père Duchesne, to make sheep’s-eyes at the guillotine, to sing
tests/les_miserables.txt:34938:romances, and play on the guitar under the balcony of ’93—it’s enough
tests/les_miserables.txt:34939:to make one spit on all these young fellows, such fools are they! They
tests/les_miserables.txt:34940:are all alike. Not one escapes. It suffices for them to breathe the air
tests/les_miserables.txt:34941:which blows through the street to lose their senses. The nineteenth
tests/les_miserables.txt:34942:century is poison. The first scamp that happens along lets his beard
tests/les_miserables.txt:34943:grow like a goat’s, thinks himself a real scoundrel, and abandons his
tests/les_miserables.txt:34944:old relatives. He’s a Republican, he’s a romantic. What does that mean,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34945:romantic? Do me the favor to tell me what it is. All possible follies.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34947:antitheses! abominations which are not even written in French! And
tests/les_miserables.txt:34948:then, they have cannons in the courtyard of the Louvre. Such are the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34949:rascalities of this age!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:34952:“You are right, uncle,” said Théodule.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34956:“Cannons in the courtyard of the Museum! For what purpose? Do you want
tests/les_miserables.txt:34957:to fire grape-shot at the Apollo Belvedere? What have those cartridges
tests/les_miserables.txt:34958:to do with the Venus de Medici? Oh! the young men of the present day
tests/les_miserables.txt:34959:are all blackguards! What a pretty creature is their Benjamin Constant!
tests/les_miserables.txt:34960:And those who are not rascals are simpletons! They do all they can to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34962:in the presence of petticoats they have a mendicant air which sets the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34964:poor creatures were ashamed of love. They are deformed, and they
tests/les_miserables.txt:34965:complete themselves by being stupid; they repeat the puns of Tiercelin
tests/les_miserables.txt:34966:and Potier, they have sack coats, stablemen’s waistcoats, shirts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34967:coarse linen, trousers of coarse cloth, boots of coarse leather, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34969:jargon to put new soles on their old shoes. And all this awkward batch
tests/les_miserables.txt:34970:of brats has political opinions, if you please. Political opinions
tests/les_miserables.txt:34971:should be strictly forbidden. They fabricate systems, they recast
tests/les_miserables.txt:34972:society, they demolish the monarchy, they fling all laws to the earth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34973:they put the attic in the cellar’s place and my porter in the place of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34974:the King, they turn Europe topsy-turvy, they reconstruct the world, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34975:all their love affairs consist in staring slily at the ankles of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34976:laundresses as these women climb into their carts. Ah! Marius! Ah! you
tests/les_miserables.txt:34977:blackguard! to go and vociferate on the public place! to discuss, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:34978:debate, to take measures! They call that measures, just God! Disorder
tests/les_miserables.txt:34979:humbles itself and becomes silly. I have seen chaos, I now see a mess.
tests/les_miserables.txt:34980:Students deliberating on the National Guard,—such a thing could not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:34981:seen among the Ogibewas nor the Cadodaches! Savages who go naked, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:34982:their noddles dressed like a shuttlecock, with a club in their paws,
tests/les_miserables.txt:34983:are less of brutes than those bachelors of arts! The four-penny
tests/les_miserables.txt:34984:monkeys! And they set up for judges! Those creatures deliberate and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34985:ratiocinate! The end of the world is come! This is plainly the end of
tests/les_miserables.txt:34986:this miserable terraqueous globe! A final hiccough was required, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:34987:France has emitted it. Deliberate, my rascals! Such things will happen
tests/les_miserables.txt:34988:so long as they go and read the newspapers under the arcades of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:34989:Odéon. That costs them a sou, and their good sense, and their
tests/les_miserables.txt:34990:intelligence, and their heart and their soul, and their wits. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:34991:emerge thence, and decamp from their families. All newspapers are
tests/les_miserables.txt:34992:pests; all, even the _Drapeau Blanc!_ At bottom, Martainville was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34993:Jacobin. Ah! just Heaven! you may boast of having driven your
tests/les_miserables.txt:34999:And profiting by the fact that M. Gillenormand was taking breath, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35000:lancer added in a magisterial manner:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:35006:M. Gillenormand continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:35008:“It is like their Sieyès! A regicide ending in a senator; for that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:35009:the way they always end. They give themselves a scar with the address
tests/les_miserables.txt:35010:of _thou_ as citizens, in order to get themselves called, eventually,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35012:September. The philosopher Sieyès! I will do myself the justice to say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35014:those philosophers, than of the spectacles of the grimacer of Tivoli!
tests/les_miserables.txt:35015:One day I saw the Senators cross the Quai Malplaquet in mantles of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35017:hideous. One would have pronounced them monkeys from the tiger’s court.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35018:Citizens, I declare to you, that your progress is madness, that your
tests/les_miserables.txt:35019:humanity is a dream, that your revolution is a crime, that your
tests/les_miserables.txt:35020:republic is a monster, that your young and virgin France comes from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35022:journalists, economists, legists, or even were you better judges of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35024:And that I announce to you, my fine fellows!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35027:“Parbleu!” cried the lieutenant, “that is wonderfully true.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35030:M. Gillenormand paused in a gesture which he had begun, wheeled round,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35031:stared Lancer Théodule intently in the eyes, and said to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:35047:Marius was, at this epoch, a handsome young man, of medium stature,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35048:with thick and intensely black hair, a lofty and intelligent brow,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35049:well-opened and passionate nostrils, an air of calmness and sincerity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35050:and with something indescribably proud, thoughtful, and innocent over
tests/les_miserables.txt:35051:his whole countenance. His profile, all of whose lines were rounded,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35052:without thereby losing their firmness, had a certain Germanic
tests/les_miserables.txt:35053:sweetness, which has made its way into the French physiognomy by way of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35054:Alsace and Lorraine, and that complete absence of angles which rendered
tests/les_miserables.txt:35055:the Sicambres so easily recognizable among the Romans, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:35056:distinguishes the leonine from the aquiline race. He was at that period
tests/les_miserables.txt:35057:of life when the mind of men who think is composed, in nearly equal
tests/les_miserables.txt:35060:might be sublime. His manners were reserved, cold, polished, not very
tests/les_miserables.txt:35061:genial. As his mouth was charming, his lips the reddest, and his teeth
tests/les_miserables.txt:35062:the whitest in the world, his smile corrected the severity of his face,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35063:as a whole. At certain moments, that pure brow and that voluptuous
tests/les_miserables.txt:35064:smile presented a singular contrast. His eyes were small, but his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35065:glance was large.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35067:At the period of his most abject misery, he had observed that young
tests/les_miserables.txt:35069:his soul. He thought that they were staring at him because of his old
tests/les_miserables.txt:35070:clothes, and that they were laughing at them; the fact is, that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:35071:stared at him because of his grace, and that they dreamed of him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35074:made him shy. He chose none of them for the excellent reason that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35076:Courfeyrac said.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35078:Courfeyrac also said to him: “Do not aspire to be venerable” [they
tests/les_miserables.txt:35079:called each other _thou_; it is the tendency of youthful friendships to
tests/les_miserables.txt:35080:slip into this mode of address]. “Let me give you a piece of advice, my
tests/les_miserables.txt:35083:of fleeing and blushing, you will become brutalized.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35086:On other occasions, Courfeyrac encountered him and said:—“Good morning,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35090:When Courfeyrac had addressed to him some remark of this nature, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:35091:avoided women, both young and old, more than ever for a week to come,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35092:and he avoided Courfeyrac to boot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35094:Nevertheless, there existed in all the immensity of creation, two women
tests/les_miserables.txt:35096:truth, he would have been very much amazed if he had been informed that
tests/les_miserables.txt:35098:chamber, and caused Courfeyrac to say: “Seeing that his servant woman
tests/les_miserables.txt:35103:For more than a year, Marius had noticed in one of the walks of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35104:Luxembourg, the one which skirts the parapet of the Pépinière, a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:35106:the same bench, at the most solitary end of the alley, on the Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:35107:l’Ouest side. Every time that that chance which meddles with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35109:walk,—and it was nearly every day,—he found this couple there. The man
tests/les_miserables.txt:35111:whole person presented the robust and weary aspect peculiar to military
tests/les_miserables.txt:35112:men who have retired from the service. If he had worn a decoration,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35113:Marius would have said: “He is an ex-officer.” He had a kindly but
tests/les_miserables.txt:35114:unapproachable air, and he never let his glance linger on the eyes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35115:any one. He wore blue trousers, a blue frock coat and a broad-brimmed
tests/les_miserables.txt:35116:hat, which always appeared to be new, a black cravat, a quaker shirt,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35117:that is to say, it was dazzlingly white, but of coarse linen. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:35121:The first time that the young girl who accompanied him came and seated
tests/les_miserables.txt:35122:herself on the bench which they seemed to have adopted, she was a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:35123:of child thirteen or fourteen years of age, so thin as to be almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:35124:homely, awkward, insignificant, and with a possible promise of handsome
tests/les_miserables.txt:35126:assurance. Her dress was both aged and childish, like the dress of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35127:scholars in a convent; it consisted of a badly cut gown of black
tests/les_miserables.txt:35130:Marius scanned this old man, who was not yet aged, and this little
tests/les_miserables.txt:35133:They conversed together with a peaceful and indifferent air. The girl
tests/les_miserables.txt:35134:chattered incessantly and merrily. The old man talked but little, and,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35137:Marius had acquired the mechanical habit of strolling in that walk. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:35142:Marius liked to arrive by the end of the alley which was furthest from
tests/les_miserables.txt:35143:their bench; he walked the whole length of the alley, passed in front
tests/les_miserables.txt:35144:of them, then returned to the extremity whence he had come, and began
tests/les_miserables.txt:35145:again. This he did five or six times in the course of his promenade,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35147:having occurred to him or to these people to exchange a greeting. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:35149:because they appeared,—to shun all glances, had, naturally, caused some
tests/les_miserables.txt:35151:the Pépinière from time to time; the studious after their lectures, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35152:others after their game of billiards. Courfeyrac, who was among the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35154:had speedily and carefully kept out of the way. He had fled,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35155:discharging at them a sobriquet, like a Parthian dart. Impressed solely
tests/les_miserables.txt:35156:with the child’s gown and the old man’s hair, he had dubbed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35157:daughter Mademoiselle Lanoire, and the father, Monsieur Leblanc, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:35158:that as no one knew them under any other title, this nickname became a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35160:Leblanc is on his bench.” And Marius, like the rest, had found it
tests/les_miserables.txt:35161:convenient to call this unknown gentleman Monsieur Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35163:We shall follow their example, and we shall say M. Leblanc, in order to
tests/les_miserables.txt:35164:facilitate this tale.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35175:During the second year, precisely at the point in this history which
tests/les_miserables.txt:35176:the reader has now reached, it chanced that this habit of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35178:why, and nearly six months elapsed, during which he did not set foot in
tests/les_miserables.txt:35179:the alley. One day, at last, he returned thither once more; it was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35183:sky of which he caught glimpses through the leaves of the trees.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35185:He went straight to “his alley,” and when he reached the end of it he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35186:perceived, still on the same bench, that well-known couple. Only, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:35187:he approached, it certainly was the same man; but it seemed to him that
tests/les_miserables.txt:35189:tall and beautiful creature, possessed of all the most charming lines
tests/les_miserables.txt:35190:of a woman at the precise moment when they are still combined with all
tests/les_miserables.txt:35191:the most ingenuous graces of the child; a pure and fugitive moment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35192:which can be expressed only by these two words,—“fifteen years.” She
tests/les_miserables.txt:35194:seemed made of marble, cheeks that seemed made of rose-leaf, a pale
tests/les_miserables.txt:35195:flush, an agitated whiteness, an exquisite mouth, whence smiles darted
tests/les_miserables.txt:35196:like sunbeams, and words like music, a head such as Raphael would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:35197:given to Mary, set upon a neck that Jean Goujon would have attributed
tests/les_miserables.txt:35198:to a Venus. And, in order that nothing might be lacking to this
tests/les_miserables.txt:35199:bewitching face, her nose was not handsome—it was pretty; neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:35200:straight nor curved, neither Italian nor Greek; it was the Parisian
tests/les_miserables.txt:35201:nose, that is to say, spiritual, delicate, irregular, pure,—which
tests/les_miserables.txt:35202:drives painters to despair, and charms poets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35204:When Marius passed near her, he could not see her eyes, which were
tests/les_miserables.txt:35205:constantly lowered. He saw only her long chestnut lashes, permeated
tests/les_miserables.txt:35208:This did not prevent the beautiful child from smiling as she listened
tests/les_miserables.txt:35209:to what the white-haired old man was saying to her, and nothing could
tests/les_miserables.txt:35210:be more fascinating than that fresh smile, combined with those drooping
tests/les_miserables.txt:35215:his stroll brought him, for the second time, near the bench, and he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:35216:examined her attentively, he recognized her as the same. In six months
tests/les_miserables.txt:35217:the little girl had become a young maiden; that was all. Nothing is
tests/les_miserables.txt:35219:blossom out in the twinkling of an eye, and become roses all at once.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35220:One left them children but yesterday; today, one finds them disquieting
tests/les_miserables.txt:35223:This child had not only grown, she had become idealized. As three days
tests/les_miserables.txt:35224:in April suffice to cover certain trees with flowers, six months had
tests/les_miserables.txt:35225:sufficed to clothe her with beauty. Her April had arrived.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35228:suddenly from indigence to luxury, indulge in expenditures of all
tests/les_miserables.txt:35229:sorts, and become dazzling, prodigal, magnificent, all of a sudden.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35230:That is the result of having pocketed an income; a note fell due
tests/les_miserables.txt:35231:yesterday. The young girl had received her quarterly income.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35233:And then, she was no longer the school-girl with her felt hat, her
tests/les_miserables.txt:35234:merino gown, her scholar’s shoes, and red hands; taste had come to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:35235:with beauty; she was a well-dressed person, clad with a sort of rich
tests/les_miserables.txt:35236:and simple elegance, and without affectation. She wore a dress of black
tests/les_miserables.txt:35237:damask, a cape of the same material, and a bonnet of white crape. Her
tests/les_miserables.txt:35238:white gloves displayed the delicacy of the hand which toyed with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35239:carved, Chinese ivory handle of a parasol, and her silken shoe outlined
tests/les_miserables.txt:35245:The second time that Marius approached her, the young girl raised her
tests/les_miserables.txt:35246:eyelids; her eyes were of a deep, celestial blue, but in that veiled
tests/les_miserables.txt:35247:azure, there was, as yet, nothing but the glance of a child. She looked
tests/les_miserables.txt:35249:beneath the sycamores, or the marble vase which cast a shadow on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35250:bench, and Marius, on his side, continued his promenade, and thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:35253:He passed near the bench where the young girl sat, five or six times,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35254:but without even turning his eyes in her direction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35260:the bench where she sat, because such was his habit.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35271:of the chestnut-trees. Marius had thrown open his whole soul to nature,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35273:passed near the bench, the young girl raised her eyes to him, the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:35274:glances met.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35276:What was there in the young girl’s glance on this occasion? Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:35277:could not have told. There was nothing and there was everything. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:35283:child; it was a mysterious gulf which had half opened, then abruptly
tests/les_miserables.txt:35284:closed again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35286:There comes a day when the young girl glances in this manner. Woe to
tests/les_miserables.txt:35287:him who chances to be there!
tests/les_miserables.txt:35289:That first gaze of a soul which does not, as yet, know itself, is like
tests/les_miserables.txt:35291:strange. Nothing can give any idea of the dangerous charm of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:35292:unexpected gleam, which flashes suddenly and vaguely forth from
tests/les_miserables.txt:35293:adorable shadows, and which is composed of all the innocence of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35295:undecided tenderness which reveals itself by chance, and which waits.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35296:It is a snare which the innocent maiden sets unknown to herself, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:35297:which she captures hearts without either wishing or knowing it. It is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35300:It is rare that a profound reverie does not spring from that glance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35301:where it falls. All purities and all candors meet in that celestial and
tests/les_miserables.txt:35302:fatal gleam which, more than all the best-planned tender glances of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35303:coquettes, possesses the magic power of causing the sudden blossoming,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35305:perfume and with poison, which is called love.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35307:That evening, on his return to his garret, Marius cast his eyes over
tests/les_miserables.txt:35308:his garments, and perceived, for the first time, that he had been so
tests/les_miserables.txt:35309:slovenly, indecorous, and inconceivably stupid as to go for his walk in
tests/les_miserables.txt:35310:the Luxembourg with his “every-day clothes,” that is to say, with a hat
tests/les_miserables.txt:35311:battered near the band, coarse carter’s boots, black trousers which
tests/les_miserables.txt:35312:showed white at the knees, and a black coat which was pale at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35321:On the following day, at the accustomed hour, Marius drew from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35322:wardrobe his new coat, his new trousers, his new hat, and his new
tests/les_miserables.txt:35323:boots; he clothed himself in this complete panoply, put on his gloves,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35326:On the way thither, he encountered Courfeyrac, and pretended not to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:35327:him. Courfeyrac, on his return home, said to his friends:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:35329:“I have just met Marius’ new hat and new coat, with Marius inside them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35336:contemplation before a statue whose head was perfectly black with
tests/les_miserables.txt:35338:bourgeois forty years of age, with a prominent stomach, who was holding
tests/les_miserables.txt:35339:by the hand a little urchin of five, and saying to him: “Shun excess,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35340:my son, keep at an equal distance from despotism and from anarchy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35341:Marius listened to this bourgeois. Then he made the circuit of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35342:basin once more. At last he directed his course towards “his alley,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35344:forced to go there and withheld from doing so. He did not perceive it
tests/les_miserables.txt:35347:On turning into the walk, he saw M. Leblanc and the young girl at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35348:other end, “on their bench.” He buttoned his coat up to the very top,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35350:examined, with a certain complaisance, the lustrous gleams of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35351:trousers, and marched on the bench. This march savored of an attack,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35352:and certainly of a desire for conquest. So I say that he marched on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35353:bench, as I should say: “Hannibal marched on Rome.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35356:However, all his movements were purely mechanical, and he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:35357:interrupted none of the habitual preoccupations of his mind and labors.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35358:At that moment, he was thinking that the _Manuel du Baccalauréat_ was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35360:allow of three tragedies of Racine and only one comedy of Molière being
tests/les_miserables.txt:35361:analyzed therein as masterpieces of the human mind. There was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35362:piercing whistling going on in his ears. As he approached the bench, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35363:held fast to the folds in his coat, and fixed his eyes on the young
tests/les_miserables.txt:35367:In proportion as he drew near, his pace slackened more and more. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:35368:arriving at some little distance from the bench, and long before he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:35369:reached the end of the walk, he halted, and could not explain to
tests/les_miserables.txt:35370:himself why he retraced his steps. He did not even say to himself that
tests/les_miserables.txt:35371:he would not go as far as the end. It was only with difficulty that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35372:young girl could have perceived him in the distance and noted his fine
tests/les_miserables.txt:35373:appearance in his new clothes. Nevertheless, he held himself very
tests/les_miserables.txt:35374:erect, in case any one should be looking at him from behind.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35376:He attained the opposite end, then came back, and this time he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35377:approached a little nearer to the bench. He even got to within three
tests/les_miserables.txt:35378:intervals of trees, but there he felt an indescribable impossibility of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35379:proceeding further, and he hesitated. He thought he saw the young
tests/les_miserables.txt:35380:girl’s face bending towards him. But he exerted a manly and violent
tests/les_miserables.txt:35382:seconds later, he rushed in front of the bench, erect and firm,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35383:reddening to the very ears, without daring to cast a glance either to
tests/les_miserables.txt:35384:the right or to the left, with his hand thrust into his coat like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35385:statesman. At the moment when he passed,—under the cannon of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35386:place,—he felt his heart beat wildly. As on the preceding day, she wore
tests/les_miserables.txt:35387:her damask gown and her crape bonnet. He heard an ineffable voice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35388:which must have been “her voice.” She was talking tranquilly. She was
tests/les_miserables.txt:35390:could not, however,” he thought, “help feeling esteem and consideration
tests/les_miserables.txt:35392:dissertation on Marcos Obrégon de la Ronde, which M. François de
tests/les_miserables.txt:35393:Neufchâteau put, as though it were his own, at the head of his edition
tests/les_miserables.txt:35394:of _Gil Blas_.” He went beyond the bench as far as the extremity of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35395:walk, which was very near, then turned on his heel and passed once more
tests/les_miserables.txt:35397:his emotions were disagreeable. As he went further from the bench and
tests/les_miserables.txt:35398:the young girl, and while his back was turned to her, he fancied that
tests/les_miserables.txt:35401:He did not attempt to approach the bench again; he halted near the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35402:middle of the walk, and there, a thing which he never did, he sat down,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35403:and reflecting in the most profoundly indistinct depths of his spirit,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35404:that after all, it was hard that persons whose white bonnet and black
tests/les_miserables.txt:35406:trousers and his new coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35409:on the point of again beginning his march towards that bench which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:35413:noticed him, and probably considered his assiduity singular.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35415:For the first time, also, he was conscious of some irreverence in
tests/les_miserables.txt:35416:designating that stranger, even in his secret thoughts, by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35417:sobriquet of M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35419:He stood thus for several minutes, with drooping head, tracing figures
tests/les_miserables.txt:35420:in the sand, with the cane which he held in his hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35422:Then he turned abruptly in the direction opposite to the bench, to M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35423:Leblanc and his daughter, and went home.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35425:That day he forgot to dine. At eight o’clock in the evening he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35426:perceived this fact, and as it was too late to go down to the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:35427:Saint-Jacques, he said: “Never mind!” and ate a bit of bread.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35429:He did not go to bed until he had brushed his coat and folded it up
tests/les_miserables.txt:35430:with great care.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35438:On the following day, Ma’am Bougon, as Courfeyrac styled the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:35439:portress-principal-tenant, housekeeper of the Gorbeau hovel, Ma’am
tests/les_miserables.txt:35441:out, but this iconoclast, Courfeyrac, respected nothing,—Ma’am Bougon
tests/les_miserables.txt:35442:observed, with stupefaction, that M. Marius was going out again in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35443:new coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35445:He went to the Luxembourg again, but he did not proceed further than
tests/les_miserables.txt:35446:his bench midway of the alley. He seated himself there, as on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35447:preceding day, surveying from a distance, and clearly making out, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35448:white bonnet, the black dress, and above all, that blue light. He did
tests/les_miserables.txt:35450:closed. He did not see M. Leblanc and his daughter retire. He concluded
tests/les_miserables.txt:35452:Later on, several weeks afterwards, when he came to think it over, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35453:could never recall where he had dined that evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35455:On the following day, which was the third, Ma’am Bougon was
tests/les_miserables.txt:35456:thunderstruck. Marius went out in his new coat. “Three days in
tests/les_miserables.txt:35457:succession!” she exclaimed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35460:strides; it was a hippopotamus undertaking the pursuit of a chamois.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35462:three-quarters choked with asthma, and furious. “If there is any
tests/les_miserables.txt:35463:sense,” she growled, “in putting on one’s best clothes every day, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:35469:The young girl was there with M. Leblanc. Marius approached as near as
tests/les_miserables.txt:35470:he could, pretending to be busy reading a book, but he halted afar off,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35471:then returned and seated himself on his bench, where he spent four
tests/les_miserables.txt:35472:hours in watching the house-sparrows who were skipping about the walk,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35473:and who produced on him the impression that they were making sport of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35478:spot, and that without knowing why. Once arrived there, he did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:35479:stir. He put on his new coat every morning, for the purpose of not
tests/les_miserables.txt:35482:She was decidedly a marvellous beauty. The only remark approaching a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35483:criticism, that could be made, was, that the contradiction between her
tests/les_miserables.txt:35484:gaze, which was melancholy, and her smile, which was merry, gave a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35485:rather wild effect to her face, which sometimes caused this sweet
tests/les_miserables.txt:35486:countenance to become strange without ceasing to be charming.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35494:On one of the last days of the second week, Marius was seated on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35495:bench, as usual, holding in his hand an open book, of which he had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:35496:turned a page for the last two hours. All at once he started. An event
tests/les_miserables.txt:35497:was taking place at the other extremity of the walk. Leblanc and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35499:father’s arm, and both were advancing slowly, towards the middle of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35500:alley where Marius was. Marius closed his book, then opened it again,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35501:then forced himself to read; he trembled; the aureole was coming
tests/les_miserables.txt:35504:advanced. It seemed to him that this lasted for a century, and that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:35505:was but a second. “What are they coming in this direction for?” he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35507:sand, this walk, two paces from me?” He was utterly upset, he would
tests/les_miserables.txt:35508:have liked to be very handsome, he would have liked to own the cross.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35509:He heard the soft and measured sound of their approaching footsteps. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:35510:imagined that M. Leblanc was darting angry glances at him. “Is that
tests/les_miserables.txt:35513:passed, and as she passed, she glanced at him. She gazed steadily at
tests/les_miserables.txt:35514:him, with a pensive sweetness which thrilled Marius from head to foot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35515:It seemed to him that she was reproaching him for having allowed so
tests/les_miserables.txt:35516:long a time to elapse without coming as far as her, and that she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:35517:saying to him: “I am coming myself.” Marius was dazzled by those eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:35520:He felt his brain on fire. She had come to him, what joy! And then, how
tests/les_miserables.txt:35522:ever seen her yet. Beautiful with a beauty which was wholly feminine
tests/les_miserables.txt:35523:and angelic, with a complete beauty which would have made Petrarch sing
tests/les_miserables.txt:35525:azure heavens. At the same time, he was horribly vexed because there
tests/les_miserables.txt:35533:dreamy when he came near the children’s nurses, that each one of them
tests/les_miserables.txt:35538:He encountered Courfeyrac under the arcades of the Odéon, and said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:35540:francs. Marius ate like an ogre. He gave the waiter six sous. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:35541:dessert, he said to Courfeyrac. “Have you read the paper? What a fine
tests/les_miserables.txt:35542:discourse Audry de Puyraveau delivered!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35547:After dinner, he said to Courfeyrac: “I will treat you to the play.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35548:They went to the Porte-Sainte-Martin to see Frédérick in _l’Auberge des
tests/les_miserables.txt:35551:At the same time, he had a redoubled attack of shyness. On emerging
tests/les_miserables.txt:35553:stepping across a gutter, and Courfeyrac, who said: “I should like to
tests/les_miserables.txt:35554:put that woman in my collection,” almost horrified him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35556:Courfeyrac invited him to breakfast at the Café Voltaire on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35558:preceding evening. He was very thoughtful and very merry. One would
tests/les_miserables.txt:35559:have said that he was taking advantage of every occasion to laugh
tests/les_miserables.txt:35560:uproariously. He tenderly embraced some man or other from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35561:provinces, who was presented to him. A circle of students formed round
tests/les_miserables.txt:35562:the table, and they spoke of the nonsense paid for by the State which
tests/les_miserables.txt:35563:was uttered from the rostrum in the Sorbonne, then the conversation
tests/les_miserables.txt:35564:fell upon the faults and omissions in Guicherat’s dictionaries and
tests/les_miserables.txt:35565:grammars. Marius interrupted the discussion to exclaim: “But it is very
tests/les_miserables.txt:35566:agreeable, all the same to have the cross!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35569:“That’s queer!” whispered Courfeyrac to Jean Prouvaire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35574:It was serious; in fact, Marius had reached that first violent and
tests/les_miserables.txt:35575:charming hour with which grand passions begin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35577:A glance had wrought all this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35579:When the mine is charged, when the conflagration is ready, nothing is
tests/les_miserables.txt:35580:more simple. A glance is a spark.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35585:The glance of women resembles certain combinations of wheels, which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:35586:tranquil in appearance yet formidable. You pass close to them every
tests/les_miserables.txt:35587:day, peaceably and with impunity, and without a suspicion of anything.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35589:come, dream, speak, laugh. All at once you feel yourself clutched; all
tests/les_miserables.txt:35590:is over. The wheels hold you fast, the glance has ensnared you. It has
tests/les_miserables.txt:35591:caught you, no matter where or how, by some portion of your thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:35592:which was fluttering loose, by some distraction which had attacked you.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35593:You are lost. The whole of you passes into it. A chain of mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:35594:forces takes possession of you. You struggle in vain; no more human
tests/les_miserables.txt:35595:succor is possible. You go on falling from gearing to gearing, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:35597:your future, your soul; and, according to whether you are in the power
tests/les_miserables.txt:35598:of a wicked creature, or of a noble heart, you will not escape from
tests/les_miserables.txt:35599:this terrifying machine otherwise than disfigured with shame, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:35608:Isolation, detachment, from everything, pride, independence, the taste
tests/les_miserables.txt:35609:of nature, the absence of daily and material activity, the life within
tests/les_miserables.txt:35610:himself, the secret conflicts of chastity, a benevolent ecstasy towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:35611:all creation, had prepared Marius for this possession which is called
tests/les_miserables.txt:35612:passion. His worship of his father had gradually become a religion,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35614:Something was required in the foreground. Love came.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35616:A full month elapsed, during which Marius went every day to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35617:Luxembourg. When the hour arrived, nothing could hold him back.—“He is
tests/les_miserables.txt:35618:on duty,” said Courfeyrac. Marius lived in a state of delight. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:35619:certain that the young girl did look at him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35621:He had finally grown bold, and approached the bench. Still, he did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:35622:pass in front of it any more, in obedience to the instinct of timidity
tests/les_miserables.txt:35623:and to the instinct of prudence common to lovers. He considered it
tests/les_miserables.txt:35624:better not to attract “the attention of the father.” He combined his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35626:profound diplomacy, so that he might be seen as much as possible by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35629:Leonidas or a Spartacus, holding in his hand a book, above which his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35631:turned her charming profile towards him with a vague smile. While
tests/les_miserables.txt:35632:conversing in the most natural and tranquil manner in the world with
tests/les_miserables.txt:35634:virginal and passionate eye. Ancient and time-honored manœuvre which
tests/les_miserables.txt:35635:Eve understood from the very first day of the world, and which every
tests/les_miserables.txt:35637:replied to one, and her glance replied to another.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35639:It must be supposed, that M. Leblanc finally noticed something, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:35641:abandoned their accustomed place and had adopted the bench by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35642:Gladiator, near the other end of the walk, as though with the object of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35644:understand, and committed this error. “The father” began to grow
tests/les_miserables.txt:35645:inexact, and no longer brought “his daughter” every day. Sometimes, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35646:came alone. Then Marius did not stay. Another blunder.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35650:His love increased. He dreamed of it every night. And then, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:35651:unexpected bliss had happened to him, oil on the fire, a redoubling of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35653:bench which “M. Leblanc and his daughter” had just quitted, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35654:handkerchief, a very simple handkerchief, without embroidery, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:35655:white, and fine, and which seemed to him to exhale ineffable perfume.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35656:He seized it with rapture. This handkerchief was marked with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35657:letters U. F. Marius knew nothing about this beautiful child,—neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:35660:initials, upon which he immediately began to construct his scaffolding.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35662:delicious name!” He kissed the handkerchief, drank it in, placed it on
tests/les_miserables.txt:35666:“I feel that her whole soul lies within it!” he exclaimed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35668:This handkerchief belonged to the old gentleman, who had simply let it
tests/les_miserables.txt:35669:fall from his pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35671:In the days which followed the finding of this treasure, he only
tests/les_miserables.txt:35672:displayed himself at the Luxembourg in the act of kissing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35673:handkerchief and laying it on his heart. The beautiful child understood
tests/les_miserables.txt:35674:nothing of all this, and signified it to him by imperceptible signs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35684:Since we have pronounced the word modesty, and since we conceal
tests/les_miserables.txt:35685:nothing, we ought to say that once, nevertheless, in spite of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35686:ecstasies, “his Ursule” caused him very serious grief. It was on one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35687:the days when she persuaded M. Leblanc to leave the bench and stroll
tests/les_miserables.txt:35688:along the walk. A brisk May breeze was blowing, which swayed the crests
tests/les_miserables.txt:35690:passed Marius’ bench. Marius had risen to his feet behind them, and was
tests/les_miserables.txt:35694:All at once, a gust of wind, more merry than the rest, and probably
tests/les_miserables.txt:35695:charged with performing the affairs of Springtime, swept down from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35697:delicious shiver, worthy of Virgil’s nymphs, and the fawns of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35698:Theocritus, and lifted her dress, the robe more sacred than that of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35706:comprehend such a thing? What she had just done is horrible!—Alas, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35707:poor child had done nothing; there had been but one culprit, the wind;
tests/les_miserables.txt:35710:in fact, that the harsh and capricious jealousy of the flesh awakens in
tests/les_miserables.txt:35712:Moreover, setting aside even that jealousy, the sight of that charming
tests/les_miserables.txt:35713:leg had contained nothing agreeable for him; the white stocking of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35714:first woman he chanced to meet would have afforded him more pleasure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35716:When “his Ursule,” after having reached the end of the walk, retraced
tests/les_miserables.txt:35717:her steps with M. Leblanc, and passed in front of the bench on which
tests/les_miserables.txt:35718:Marius had seated himself once more, Marius darted a sullen and
tests/les_miserables.txt:35719:ferocious glance at her. The young girl gave way to that slight
tests/les_miserables.txt:35720:straightening up with a backward movement, accompanied by a raising of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35721:the eyelids, which signifies: “Well, what is the matter?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35727:Marius had hardly made this scene at her with his eyes, when some one
tests/les_miserables.txt:35728:crossed the walk. It was a veteran, very much bent, extremely wrinkled,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35730:the little oval plaque of red cloth, with the crossed swords, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35731:soldier’s cross of Saint-Louis, and adorned, in addition, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35732:coat-sleeve, which had no arm within it, with a silver chin and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35733:wooden leg. Marius thought he perceived that this man had an extremely
tests/les_miserables.txt:35734:well satisfied air. It even struck him that the aged cynic, as he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35736:merry wink, as though some chance had created an understanding between
tests/les_miserables.txt:35737:them, and as though they had shared some piece of good luck together.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35738:What did that relic of Mars mean by being so contented? What had passed
tests/les_miserables.txt:35739:between that wooden leg and the other? Marius reached a paroxysm of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35745:pardoned her; but this cost him a great effort; he sulked for three
tests/les_miserables.txt:35748:Nevertheless, in spite of all this, and because of all this, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:35757:The reader has just seen how Marius discovered, or thought that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:35758:discovered, that _She_ was named Ursule.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35765:He had committed his first blunder, by falling into the ambush of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35766:bench by the Gladiator. He had committed a second, by not remaining at
tests/les_miserables.txt:35767:the Luxembourg when M. Leblanc came thither alone. He now committed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35772:new, three-story house, of modest appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35777:His hunger was increasing. He knew her first name, at least, a charming
tests/les_miserables.txt:35782:them disappear through the carriage gate, he entered in their train and
tests/les_miserables.txt:35785:“Is that the gentleman who lives on the first floor, who has just come
tests/les_miserables.txt:35792:Another step gained. This success emboldened Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35802:the unfortunate, though not rich himself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35809:“Are you a police spy, sir?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35815:daughter of a gentleman who lives on his income, and that she lives
tests/les_miserables.txt:35819:On the following day, M. Leblanc and his daughter made only a very
tests/les_miserables.txt:35822:up the habit of doing. On arriving at the carriage entrance M. Leblanc
tests/les_miserables.txt:35823:made his daughter pass in first, then paused, before crossing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35826:On the next day they did not come to the Luxembourg. Marius waited for
tests/les_miserables.txt:35835:went and did sentinel duty under their windows. This carried him on to
tests/les_miserables.txt:35836:ten o’clock in the evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35838:His dinner took care of itself. Fever nourishes the sick man, and love
tests/les_miserables.txt:35841:He spent a week in this manner. M. Leblanc no longer appeared at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35844:Marius indulged in melancholy conjectures; he dared not watch the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35845:porte-cochère during the day; he contented himself with going at night
tests/les_miserables.txt:35847:across them, and his heart began to beat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35853:they have gone out?” He waited until ten o’clock. Until midnight. Until
tests/les_miserables.txt:35861:Luxembourg; he had expected this. At dusk, he went to the house.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35866:Marius rapped at the porte-cochère, entered, and said to the porter:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:35893:And the porter, raising his eyes, recognized Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35895:“Come! So it’s you!” said he; “but you are decidedly a spy then?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:35909:Human societies all have what is called in theatrical parlance, _a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35910:third lower floor_. The social soil is everywhere undermined, sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:35913:a bottom in this obscure sub-soil, which sometimes gives way beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:35914:civilization, and which our indifference and heedlessness trample under
tests/les_miserables.txt:35915:foot. The Encyclopedia, in the last century, was a mine that was almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:35916:open to the sky. The shades, those sombre hatchers of primitive
tests/les_miserables.txt:35918:under the Cæsars and to inundate the human race with light. For in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35919:sacred shadows there lies latent light. Volcanoes are full of a shadow
tests/les_miserables.txt:35920:that is capable of flashing forth. Every form begins by being night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35921:The catacombs, in which the first mass was said, were not alone the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35922:cellar of Rome, they were the vaults of the world.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35924:Beneath the social construction, that complicated marvel of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35925:structure, there are excavations of all sorts. There is the religious
tests/les_miserables.txt:35926:mine, the philosophical mine, the economic mine, the revolutionary
tests/les_miserables.txt:35927:mine. Such and such a pick-axe with the idea, such a pick with ciphers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35928:Such another with wrath. People hail and answer each other from one
tests/les_miserables.txt:35929:catacomb to another. Utopias travel about underground, in the pipes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35930:There they branch out in every direction. They sometimes meet, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:35931:fraternize there. Jean-Jacques lends his pick to Diogenes, who lends
tests/les_miserables.txt:35932:him his lantern. Sometimes they enter into combat there. Calvin seizes
tests/les_miserables.txt:35933:Socinius by the hair. But nothing arrests nor interrupts the tension of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35935:activity, which goes and comes, mounts, descends, and mounts again in
tests/les_miserables.txt:35936:these obscurities, and which immense unknown swarming slowly transforms
tests/les_miserables.txt:35937:the top and the bottom and the inside and the outside. Society hardly
tests/les_miserables.txt:35938:even suspects this digging which leaves its surface intact and changes
tests/les_miserables.txt:35940:are varying works, as there are extractions. What emerges from these
tests/les_miserables.txt:35941:deep excavations? The future.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35944:good, up to a degree which the social philosophies are able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:35945:recognize; beyond that degree it is doubtful and mixed; lower down, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:35946:becomes terrible. At a certain depth, the excavations are no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:35947:penetrable by the spirit of civilization, the limit breathable by man
tests/les_miserables.txt:35950:The descending scale is a strange one; and each one of the rungs of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35951:this ladder corresponds to a stage where philosophy can find foothold,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35952:and where one encounters one of these workmen, sometimes divine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35954:there is Descartes; below Descartes, there is Voltaire; below Voltaire,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35955:there is Condorcet; below Condorcet, there is Robespierre; below
tests/les_miserables.txt:35957:goes on. Lower down, confusedly, at the limit which separates the
tests/les_miserables.txt:35958:indistinct from the invisible, one perceives other gloomy men, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:35959:perhaps do not exist as yet. The men of yesterday are spectres; those
tests/les_miserables.txt:35961:obscurely. The embryonic work of the future is one of the visions of
tests/les_miserables.txt:35964:A world in limbo, in the state of fœtus, what an unheard-of spectre!
tests/les_miserables.txt:35968:Surely, although a divine and invisible chain unknown to themselves,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35971:greatly, and the light of some contrasts with the blaze of others. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:35972:first are paradisiacal, the last are tragic. Nevertheless, whatever may
tests/les_miserables.txt:35973:be the contrast, all these toilers, from the highest to the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:35974:nocturnal, from the wisest to the most foolish, possess one likeness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:35977:of themselves. They have a glance, and that glance seeks the absolute.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35978:The first has the whole heavens in his eyes; the last, enigmatical
tests/les_miserables.txt:35985:With it, evil commences. Reflect and tremble in the presence of any one
tests/les_miserables.txt:35986:who has no glance at all. The social order has its black miners.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35989:becomes extinct.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35991:Below all these mines which we have just mentioned, below all these
tests/les_miserables.txt:35993:progress and utopia, much further on in the earth, much lower than
tests/les_miserables.txt:35994:Marat, lower than Babeuf, lower, much lower, and without any connection
tests/les_miserables.txt:35997:the grave of shadows. It is the cellar of the blind. _Inferi_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:35999:This communicates with the abyss.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36007:There disinterestedness vanishes. The demon is vaguely outlined; each
tests/les_miserables.txt:36009:gnaws. The social Ugolino is in this gulf.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36011:The wild spectres who roam in this grave, almost beasts, almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:36012:phantoms, are not occupied with universal progress; they are ignorant
tests/les_miserables.txt:36014:the satisfaction of their individual desires. They are almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:36015:unconscious, and there exists within them a sort of terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:36016:obliteration. They have two mothers, both step-mothers, ignorance and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36017:misery. They have a guide, necessity; and for all forms of
tests/les_miserables.txt:36018:satisfaction, appetite. They are brutally voracious, that is to say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36019:ferocious, not after the fashion of the tyrant, but after the fashion
tests/les_miserables.txt:36020:of the tiger. From suffering these spectres pass to crime; fatal
tests/les_miserables.txt:36021:affiliation, dizzy creation, logic of darkness. That which crawls in
tests/les_miserables.txt:36022:the social third lower level is no longer complaint stifled by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36023:absolute; it is the protest of matter. Man there becomes a dragon. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:36025:Satan—that is the point reached. From that vault Lacenaire emerges.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36027:We have just seen, in Book Fourth, one of the compartments of the upper
tests/les_miserables.txt:36028:mine, of the great political, revolutionary, and philosophical
tests/les_miserables.txt:36029:excavation. There, as we have just said, all is pure, noble, dignified,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36032:effected, taken as a whole has a name: Progress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36034:The moment has now come when we must take a look at other depths,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36035:hideous depths. There exists beneath society, we insist upon this
tests/les_miserables.txt:36036:point, and there will exist, until that day when ignorance shall be
tests/les_miserables.txt:36037:dissipated, the great cavern of evil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36039:This cavern is below all, and is the foe of all. It is hatred, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:36040:exception. This cavern knows no philosophers; its dagger has never cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:36041:a pen. Its blackness has no connection with the sublime blackness of
tests/les_miserables.txt:36042:the inkstand. Never have the fingers of night which contract beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:36043:this stifling ceiling, turned the leaves of a book nor unfolded a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36044:newspaper. Babeuf is a speculator to Cartouche; Marat is an aristocrat
tests/les_miserables.txt:36045:to Schinderhannes. This cavern has for its object the destruction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:36048:Of everything. Including the upper superior mines, which it execrates.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36049:It not only undermines, in its hideous swarming, the actual social
tests/les_miserables.txt:36051:undermines civilization, it undermines revolution, it undermines
tests/les_miserables.txt:36053:assassination. It is darkness, and it desires chaos. Its vault is
tests/les_miserables.txt:36054:formed of ignorance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36056:All the others, those above it, have but one object—to suppress it. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:36059:their contemplation of the absolute. Destroy the cavern Ignorance and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36062:Let us condense, in a few words, a part of what we have just written.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36063:The only social peril is darkness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36065:Humanity is identity. All men are made of the same clay. There is no
tests/les_miserables.txt:36066:difference, here below, at least, in predestination. The same shadow in
tests/les_miserables.txt:36068:ignorance, mingled with the human paste, blackens it. This incurable
tests/les_miserables.txt:36069:blackness takes possession of the interior of a man and is there
tests/les_miserables.txt:36070:converted into evil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36081:Gueulemer was a Hercules of no defined position. For his lair he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:36082:the sewer of the Arche-Marion. He was six feet high, his pectoral
tests/les_miserables.txt:36083:muscles were of marble, his biceps of brass, his breath was that of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36084:cavern, his torso that of a colossus, his head that of a bird. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:36085:thought one beheld the Farnese Hercules clad in duck trousers and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36086:cotton velvet waistcoat. Gueulemer, built after this sculptural
tests/les_miserables.txt:36089:with crow’s-feet, harsh, short hair, cheeks like a brush, a beard like
tests/les_miserables.txt:36090:that of a wild boar; the reader can see the man before him. His muscles
tests/les_miserables.txt:36091:called for work, his stupidity would have none of it. He was a great,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36092:idle force. He was an assassin through coolness. He was thought to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36093:creole. He had, probably, somewhat to do with Marshal Brune, having
tests/les_miserables.txt:36097:The diaphaneity of Babet contrasted with the grossness of Gueulemer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36100:He declared that he was a chemist. He had been a jack of all trades. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:36102:fine talker, who underlined his smiles and accentuated his gestures.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36103:His occupation consisted in selling, in the open air, plaster busts and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36104:portraits of “the head of the State.” In addition to this, he extracted
tests/les_miserables.txt:36107:Academies, makes physical experiments on metals and metalloids,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36108:extracts teeth, undertakes stumps abandoned by his brother
tests/les_miserables.txt:36109:practitioners. Price: one tooth, one franc, fifty centimes; two teeth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36110:two francs; three teeth, two francs, fifty. Take advantage of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:36112:many teeth extracted as possible. He had been married and had had
tests/les_miserables.txt:36113:children. He did not know what had become of his wife and children. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:36114:had lost them as one loses his handkerchief. Babet read the papers, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36115:striking exception in the world to which he belonged. One day, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36117:read in the _Messager_, that a woman had just given birth to a child,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36118:who was doing well, and had a calf’s muzzle, and he exclaimed: “There’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:36119:a fortune! my wife has not the wit to present me with a child like
tests/les_miserables.txt:36127:with black, before he showed himself. At nightfall he emerged from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36129:knew. He only addressed his accomplices in the most absolute darkness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36130:and with his back turned to them. Was his name Claquesous? Certainly
tests/les_miserables.txt:36131:not. If a candle was brought, he put on a mask. He was a ventriloquist.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36132:Babet said: “Claquesous is a nocturne for two voices.” Claquesous was
tests/les_miserables.txt:36134:Claquesous being a sobriquet; none was sure that he had a voice, as his
tests/les_miserables.txt:36135:stomach spoke more frequently than his voice; no one was sure that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:36136:had a face, as he was never seen without his mask. He disappeared as
tests/les_miserables.txt:36140:A lugubrious being was Montparnasse. Montparnasse was a child; less
tests/les_miserables.txt:36141:than twenty years of age, with a handsome face, lips like cherries,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36142:charming black hair, the brilliant light of springtime in his eyes; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:36143:had all vices and aspired to all crimes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36146:street boy turned pickpocket, and a pickpocket turned garroter. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:36147:genteel, effeminate, graceful, robust, sluggish, ferocious. The rim of
tests/les_miserables.txt:36148:his hat was curled up on the left side, in order to make room for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36150:violence. His coat was of the best cut, but threadbare. Montparnasse
tests/les_miserables.txt:36151:was a fashion-plate in misery and given to the commission of murders.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36152:The cause of all this youth’s crimes was the desire to be well-dressed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36153:The first grisette who had said to him: “You are handsome!” had cast
tests/les_miserables.txt:36156:of elegance is idleness; idleness in a poor man means crime. Few
tests/les_miserables.txt:36158:numerous corpses in his past. More than one passer-by lay with
tests/les_miserables.txt:36159:outstretched arms in the presence of this wretch, with his face in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36160:pool of blood. Curled, pomaded, with laced waist, the hips of a woman,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36161:the bust of a Prussian officer, the murmur of admiration from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36162:boulevard wenches surrounding him, his cravat knowingly tied, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36163:bludgeon in his pocket, a flower in his buttonhole; such was this dandy
tests/les_miserables.txt:36164:of the sepulchre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36173:among the police, and striving to escape Vidocq’s indiscreet glances
tests/les_miserables.txt:36174:“under divers forms, tree, flame, fountain,” lending each other their
tests/les_miserables.txt:36175:names and their traps, hiding in their own shadows, boxes with secret
tests/les_miserables.txt:36176:compartments and refuges for each other, stripping off their
tests/les_miserables.txt:36178:sometimes simplifying matters to the point of consisting of but one
tests/les_miserables.txt:36179:individual, sometimes multiplying themselves to such a point that
tests/les_miserables.txt:36180:Coco-Latour himself took them for a whole throng.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36183:with four heads, operating on a grand scale on Paris; they were that
tests/les_miserables.txt:36184:monstrous polyp of evil, which inhabits the crypt of society.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36186:Thanks to their ramifications, and to the network underlying their
tests/les_miserables.txt:36187:relations, Babet, Gueulemer, Claquesous, and Montparnasse were charged
tests/les_miserables.txt:36189:Seine. The inventors of ideas of that nature, men with nocturnal
tests/les_miserables.txt:36190:imaginations, applied to them to have their ideas executed. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:36191:furnished the canvas to the four rascals, and the latter undertook the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36192:preparation of the scenery. They labored at the stage setting. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:36193:were always in a condition to lend a force proportioned and suitable to
tests/les_miserables.txt:36194:all crimes which demanded a lift of the shoulder, and which were
tests/les_miserables.txt:36195:sufficiently lucrative. When a crime was in quest of arms, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:36196:under-let their accomplices. They kept a troupe of actors of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36200:woke up, on the plains which adjoin the Salpêtrière. There they held
tests/les_miserables.txt:36201:their conferences. They had twelve black hours before them; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:36202:regulated their employment accordingly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36204:_Patron-Minette_,—such was the name which was bestowed in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36205:subterranean circulation on the association of these four men. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36206:fantastic, ancient, popular parlance, which is vanishing day by day,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36207:_Patron-Minette_ signifies the morning, the same as _entre chien et
tests/les_miserables.txt:36209:_Patron-Minette_, was probably derived from the hour at which their
tests/les_miserables.txt:36212:When the President of the Assizes visited Lacenaire in his prison, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36213:questioned him concerning a misdeed which Lacenaire denied, “Who did
tests/les_miserables.txt:36214:it?” demanded the President. Lacenaire made this response, enigmatical
tests/les_miserables.txt:36215:so far as the magistrate was concerned, but clear to the police:
tests/les_miserables.txt:36219:A piece can sometimes be divined on the enunciation of the personages;
tests/les_miserables.txt:36220:in the same manner a band can almost be judged from the list of
tests/les_miserables.txt:36221:ruffians composing it. Here are the appellations to which the principal
tests/les_miserables.txt:36223:special memoirs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36225:Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36227:Brujon. [There was a Brujon dynasty; we cannot refrain from
tests/les_miserables.txt:36230:Boulatruelle, the road-mender already introduced.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36240:Dépêche. (Make haste.)
tests/les_miserables.txt:36244:Glorieux, a discharged convict.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36246:Barrecarrosse (Stop-carriage), called Monsieur Dupont.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36254:Kruideniers, called Bizarro.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36256:Mangedentelle. (Lace-eater.)
tests/les_miserables.txt:36260:Demi-Liard, called Deux-Milliards.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36262:Etc., etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36264:We pass over some, and not the worst of them. These names have faces
tests/les_miserables.txt:36265:attached. They do not express merely beings, but species. Each one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:36266:these names corresponds to a variety of those misshapen fungi from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36267:under side of civilization.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36269:Those beings, who were not very lavish with their countenances, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:36271:the wild nights which they passed, they went off by day to sleep,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36275:What became of these men? They still exist. They have always existed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36276:Horace speaks of them: _Ambubaiarum collegia, pharmacopolæ, mendici,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36277:mimæ_; and so long as society remains what it is, they will remain what
tests/les_miserables.txt:36278:they are. Beneath the obscure roof of their cavern, they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:36279:continually born again from the social ooze. They return, spectres, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:36280:always identical; only, they no longer bear the same names and they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:36284:They always have the same faculties. From the vagrant to the tramp, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36285:race is maintained in its purity. They divine purses in pockets, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:36286:scent out watches in fobs. Gold and silver possess an odor for them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36289:They experience the quivers of a spider at the passage of a stranger or
tests/les_miserables.txt:36290:of a man from the country.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36292:These men are terrible, when one encounters them, or catches a glimpse
tests/les_miserables.txt:36294:be men but forms composed of living mists; one would say that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:36295:habitually constitute one mass with the shadows, that they are in no
tests/les_miserables.txt:36296:wise distinct from them, that they possess no other soul than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36301:What is necessary to cause these spectres to vanish? Light. Light in
tests/les_miserables.txt:36302:floods. Not a single bat can resist the dawn. Light up society from
tests/les_miserables.txt:36317:Summer passed, then the autumn; winter came. Neither M. Leblanc nor the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36318:young girl had again set foot in the Luxembourg garden. Thenceforth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36319:Marius had but one thought,—to gaze once more on that sweet and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36320:adorable face. He sought constantly, he sought everywhere; he found
tests/les_miserables.txt:36321:nothing. He was no longer Marius, the enthusiastic dreamer, the firm,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36322:resolute, ardent man, the bold defier of fate, the brain which erected
tests/les_miserables.txt:36323:future on future, the young spirit encumbered with plans, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:36324:projects, with pride, with ideas and wishes; he was a lost dog. He fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:36325:into a black melancholy. All was over. Work disgusted him, walking
tests/les_miserables.txt:36326:tired him. Vast nature, formerly so filled with forms, lights, voices,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36327:counsels, perspectives, horizons, teachings, now lay empty before him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36330:He thought incessantly, for he could not do otherwise; but he no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:36335:He heaped a hundred reproaches on himself. “Why did I follow her? I was
tests/les_miserables.txt:36339:It is my own fault,” etc., etc. Courfeyrac, to whom he confided
tests/les_miserables.txt:36341:everything,—that was his nature,—had begun by congratulating him on
tests/les_miserables.txt:36343:into this melancholy state, he ended by saying to him: “I see that you
tests/les_miserables.txt:36344:have been simply an animal. Here, come to the Chaumière.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36347:Once, having confidence in a fine September sun, Marius had allowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:36348:himself to be taken to the ball at Sceaux by Courfeyrac, Bossuet, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36350:there. Of course he did not see the one he sought.—“But this is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36351:place, all the same, where all lost women are found,” grumbled
tests/les_miserables.txt:36355:with singing creatures on their way home from the feast, which passed
tests/les_miserables.txt:36356:close to him, as he, in his discouragement, breathed in the acrid scent
tests/les_miserables.txt:36360:given up to his inward anguish, going and coming in his pain like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36363:On another occasion, he had an encounter which produced on him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36364:singular effect. He met, in the narrow streets in the vicinity of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36366:cap with a long visor, which allowed a glimpse of locks of very white
tests/les_miserables.txt:36367:hair. Marius was struck with the beauty of this white hair, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36368:scrutinized the man, who was walking slowly and as though absorbed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:36369:painful meditation. Strange to say, he thought that he recognized M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36370:Leblanc. The hair was the same, also the profile, so far as the cap
tests/les_miserables.txt:36371:permitted a view of it, the mien identical, only more depressed. But
tests/les_miserables.txt:36372:why these workingman’s clothes? What was the meaning of this? What
tests/les_miserables.txt:36374:recovered himself, his first impulse was to follow the man; who knows
tests/les_miserables.txt:36375:whether he did not hold at last the clue which he was seeking? In any
tests/les_miserables.txt:36376:case, he must see the man near at hand, and clear up the mystery. But
tests/les_miserables.txt:36377:the idea occurred to him too late, the man was no longer there. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:36378:turned into some little side street, and Marius could not find him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36379:This encounter occupied his mind for three days and then was effaced.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36380:“After all,” he said to himself, “it was probably only a resemblance.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36392:At that epoch, to tell the truth, there were no other inhabitants in
tests/les_miserables.txt:36393:the house, except himself and those Jondrettes whose rent he had once
tests/les_miserables.txt:36399:afternoon, but it was the 2d of February, that ancient Candlemas day
tests/les_miserables.txt:36400:whose treacherous sun, the precursor of a six weeks’ cold spell,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36401:inspired Mathieu Laensberg with these two lines, which have with
tests/les_miserables.txt:36402:justice remained classic:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36405:L’ours rentre dans en sa caverne.26
tests/les_miserables.txt:36412:He had just crossed his threshold, where Ma’am Bougon was sweeping at
tests/les_miserables.txt:36415:“What is there that is cheap now? Everything is dear. There is nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:36416:in the world that is cheap except trouble; you can get that for
tests/les_miserables.txt:36420:Marius slowly ascended the boulevard towards the barrier, in order to
tests/les_miserables.txt:36421:reach the Rue Saint-Jacques. He was walking along with drooping head.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36423:All at once, he felt some one elbow him in the dusk; he wheeled round,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36424:and saw two young girls clad in rags, the one tall and slim, the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:36426:terror, and with the appearance of fleeing; they had been coming to
tests/les_miserables.txt:36428:the twilight, Marius could distinguish their livid faces, their wild
tests/les_miserables.txt:36430:petticoats, and their bare feet. They were talking as they ran. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:36431:taller said in a very low voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36433:“The bobbies have come. They came near nabbing me at the half-circle.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36438:police had come near apprehending these two children, and that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36439:latter had escaped.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36442:created, for a few minutes, in the gloom, a sort of vague white spot,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36448:grayish package lying on the ground at his feet. He stooped and picked
tests/les_miserables.txt:36449:it up. It was a sort of envelope which appeared to contain papers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36454:He retraced his steps, he called, he did not find them; he reflected
tests/les_miserables.txt:36455:that they must already be far away, put the package in his pocket, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36458:On the way, he saw in an alley of the Rue Mouffetard, a child’s coffin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36459:covered with a black cloth resting on three chairs, and illuminated by
tests/les_miserables.txt:36460:a candle. The two girls of the twilight recurred to his mind.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36463:one’s children die; it is to see them leading an evil life.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36466:Then those shadows which had varied his melancholy vanished from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:36467:thoughts, and he fell back once more into his habitual preoccupations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36468:He fell to thinking once more of his six months of love and happiness
tests/les_miserables.txt:36472:“How gloomy my life has become!” he said to himself. “Young girls are
tests/les_miserables.txt:36484:hand came in contact, in the pocket of his coat, with the packet which
tests/les_miserables.txt:36485:he had picked up on the boulevard. He had forgotten it. He thought that
tests/les_miserables.txt:36486:it would be well to open it, and that this package might possibly
tests/les_miserables.txt:36487:contain the address of the young girls, if it really belonged to them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36488:and, in any case, the information necessary to a restitution to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36493:It was not sealed and contained four letters, also unsealed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36497:All four exhaled a horrible odor of tobacco.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36499:The first was addressed: _“To Madame, Madame la Marquise de Grucheray,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36500:the place opposite the Chamber of Deputies, No.—”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:36503:information which he sought, and that, moreover, the letter being open,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36504:it was probable that it could be read without impropriety.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36506:It was conceived as follows:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36508:Madame la Marquise: The virtue of clemency and piety is that which most
tests/les_miserables.txt:36509:closely unites sosiety. Turn your Christian spirit and cast a look of
tests/les_miserables.txt:36510:compassion on this unfortunate Spanish victim of loyalty and attachment
tests/les_miserables.txt:36511:to the sacred cause of legitimacy, who has given with his blood,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36512:consecrated his fortune, evverything, to defend that cause, and to-day
tests/les_miserables.txt:36514:honorable person will grant succor to preserve an existence exteremely
tests/les_miserables.txt:36515:painful for a military man of education and honor full of wounds,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36516:counts in advance on the humanity which animates you and on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36517:interest which Madame la Marquise bears to a nation so unfortunate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36519:theirs charming souvenir.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36521:My respectful sentiments, with which I have the honor to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:36525:    refuge in France, who finds himself on travells for his country,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36526:    and the resources are lacking him to continue his travells.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36530:address in the second letter, whose superscription read: _À Madame,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36535:    children the last of which is only eight months old.  I sick since
tests/les_miserables.txt:36536:    my last confinement, abandoned by my husband five months ago,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36537:    haveing no resources in the world the most frightful indigance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36540:    with profound respect,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36545:Marius turned to the third letter, which was a petition like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36546:preceding; he read:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36548:    Monsieur PABOURGEOT, Elector, wholesale stocking merchant, Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:36549:    Saint-Denis on the corner of the Rue aux Fers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36554:    The subject is historical, and the action takes place in Auvergne
tests/les_miserables.txt:36555:    in the time of the Empire; the style, I think, is natural, laconic,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36556:    and may have some merit. There are couplets to be sung in four
tests/les_miserables.txt:36557:    places. The comic, the serious, the unexpected, are mingled in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36558:    variety of characters, and a tinge of romanticism lightly spread
tests/les_miserables.txt:36559:    through all the intrigue which proceeds misteriously, and ends,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36561:    of brilliant scenes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36563:    My principal object is to satisfi the desire which progressively
tests/les_miserables.txt:36564:    animates the man of our century, that is to say, the fashion, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:36565:    capritious and bizarre weathervane which changes at almost every
tests/les_miserables.txt:36569:    the egotism of priviliged authors, may obtaine my exclusion from
tests/les_miserables.txt:36570:    the theatre, for I am not ignorant of the mortifications with which
tests/les_miserables.txt:36571:    newcomers are treated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36574:    protector of men of litters emboldens me to send you my daughter
tests/les_miserables.txt:36575:    who will explain our indigant situation to you, lacking bread and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36577:    accept the dedication of my drama which I desire to make to you and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36580:    protection, and of adorning my writings with your name.  If you
tests/les_miserables.txt:36582:    immediately occupy myself in making a piesse of verse to pay you my
tests/les_miserables.txt:36583:    tribute of gratitude. Which I shall endeavor to render this piesse
tests/les_miserables.txt:36584:    as perfect as possible, will be sent to you before it is inserted
tests/les_miserables.txt:36589:My most respectful complements,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36594:    Excuse me for sending my daughter and not presenting myself, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:36595:    sad motives connected with the toilet do not permit me, alas! to go
tests/les_miserables.txt:36600:benevolent Gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-haut-Pas_. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:36601:contained the following lines:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36603:    BENEVOLENT MAN: If you deign to accompany my daughter, you will
tests/les_miserables.txt:36604:    behold a misserable calamity, and I will show you my certificates.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36606:    At the aspect of these writings your generous soul will be moved
tests/les_miserables.txt:36607:    with a sentiment of obvious benevolence, for true philosophers
tests/les_miserables.txt:36610:    Admit, compassionate man, that it is necessary to suffer the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:36611:    cruel need, and that it is very painful, for the sake of obtaining
tests/les_miserables.txt:36615:    several and too prodigal or too protecting for others.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36617:    I await your presence or your offering, if you deign to make one,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36618:    and I beseech you to accept the respectful sentiments with which I
tests/les_miserables.txt:36624:P. FABANTOU, dramatic artist.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36627:After perusing these four letters, Marius did not find himself much
tests/les_miserables.txt:36628:further advanced than before.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36630:In the first place, not one of the signers gave his address.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36632:Then, they seemed to come from four different individuals, Don Alvarès,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36633:Mistress Balizard, the poet Genflot, and dramatic artist Fabantou; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:36637:What conclusion was to be drawn from this, except that they all come
tests/les_miserables.txt:36640:Moreover, and this rendered the conjecture all the more probable, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36641:coarse and yellow paper was the same in all four, the odor of tobacco
tests/les_miserables.txt:36643:the same orthographical faults were reproduced with the greatest
tests/les_miserables.txt:36645:them than the Spanish captain.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36648:been a chance find, it would have borne the air of a mystification.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36649:Marius was too melancholy to take even a chance pleasantry well, and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:36650:lend himself to a game which the pavement of the street seemed desirous
tests/les_miserables.txt:36655:Nothing, however, indicated that these letters belonged to the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:36657:evidently papers of no value. Marius replaced them in their envelope,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36658:flung the whole into a corner and went to bed. About seven o’clock in
tests/les_miserables.txt:36660:settle down to work, when there came a soft knock at his door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36662:As he owned nothing, he never locked his door, unless occasionally,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36664:when absent he left his key in the lock. “You will be robbed,” said
tests/les_miserables.txt:36669:There came a second knock, as gentle as the first.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36676:eyes from the books and manuscripts on his table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36678:A voice which did not belong to Ma’am Bougon replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36680:“Excuse me, sir—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36683:It was a dull, broken, hoarse, strangled voice, the voice of an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:36700:of the garret, through which the light fell, was precisely opposite the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36702:emaciated, slender creature; there was nothing but a chemise and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36703:petticoat upon that chilled and shivering nakedness. Her girdle was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36705:her chemise, a blond and lymphatic pallor, earth-colored collar-bones,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36708:and the look of a corrupt old woman; fifty years mingled with fifteen;
tests/les_miserables.txt:36709:one of those beings which are both feeble and horrible, and which cause
tests/les_miserables.txt:36710:those to shudder whom they do not cause to weep.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36713:who was almost like the forms of the shadows which traverse dreams.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36716:come into the world to be homely. In her early childhood she must even
tests/les_miserables.txt:36717:have been pretty. The grace of her age was still struggling against the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36718:hideous, premature decrepitude of debauchery and poverty. The remains
tests/les_miserables.txt:36719:of beauty were dying away in that face of sixteen, like the pale
tests/les_miserables.txt:36720:sunlight which is extinguished under hideous clouds at dawn on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36723:That face was not wholly unknown to Marius. He thought he remembered
tests/les_miserables.txt:36728:The young girl replied in her voice of a drunken convict:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36733:She called Marius by his name; he could not doubt that he was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36737:Without waiting for him to tell her to advance, she entered. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:36738:entered resolutely, staring, with a sort of assurance that made the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36740:Large holes in her petticoat permitted glimpses of her long legs and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36743:She held a letter in her hand, which she presented to Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36745:Marius, as he opened the letter, noticed that the enormous wafer which
tests/les_miserables.txt:36746:sealed it was still moist. The message could not have come from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36747:distance. He read:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36757:    I am with the distinguished consideration which is due to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36758:    benefactors of humanity,—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36765:This letter, coming in the very midst of the mysterious adventure which
tests/les_miserables.txt:36766:had occupied Marius’ thoughts ever since the preceding evening, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:36767:like a candle in a cellar. All was suddenly illuminated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36769:This letter came from the same place as the other four. There was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36771:same odor of tobacco.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36775:the dramatic poet Genflot, the old comedian Fabantou, were all four
tests/les_miserables.txt:36779:had, as we have said, but very rare occasion to see, to even catch a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36782:than once to pass the Jondrettes in the corridor or on the stairs; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:36784:on the preceding evening, he had jostled the Jondrette girls on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36785:boulevard, without recognizing them, for it had evidently been they,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36786:and it was with great difficulty that the one who had just entered his
tests/les_miserables.txt:36788:recollection of having met her elsewhere.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36790:Now he saw everything clearly. He understood that his neighbor
tests/les_miserables.txt:36791:Jondrette, in his distress, exercised the industry of speculating on
tests/les_miserables.txt:36792:the charity of benevolent persons, that he procured addresses, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:36794:compassionate, letters which his daughters delivered at their risk and
tests/les_miserables.txt:36795:peril, for this father had come to such a pass, that he risked his
tests/les_miserables.txt:36798:the evening before, from their breathless condition, from their terror
tests/les_miserables.txt:36799:and from the words of slang which he had overheard, these unfortunate
tests/les_miserables.txt:36800:creatures were plying some inexplicably sad profession, and that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36801:result of the whole was, in the midst of human society, as it is now
tests/les_miserables.txt:36802:constituted, two miserable beings who were neither girls nor women, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36803:species of impure and innocent monsters produced by misery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36805:Sad creatures, without name, or sex, or age, to whom neither good nor
tests/les_miserables.txt:36806:evil were any longer possible, and who, on emerging from childhood,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36808:responsibility. Souls which blossomed out yesterday, and are faded
tests/les_miserables.txt:36809:to-day, like those flowers let fall in the streets, which are soiled
tests/les_miserables.txt:36810:with every sort of mire, while waiting for some wheel to crush them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36812:the young girl was wandering back and forth in the garret with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:36813:audacity of a spectre. She kicked about, without troubling herself as
tests/les_miserables.txt:36814:to her nakedness. Occasionally her chemise, which was untied and torn,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36815:fell almost to her waist. She moved the chairs about, she disarranged
tests/les_miserables.txt:36816:the toilet articles which stood on the commode, she handled Marius’
tests/les_miserables.txt:36817:clothes, she rummaged about to see what there was in the corners.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36822:And she hummed scraps of vaudevilles, as though she had been alone,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36823:frolicsome refrains which her hoarse and guttural voice rendered
tests/les_miserables.txt:36826:An indescribable constraint, weariness, and humiliation were
tests/les_miserables.txt:36827:perceptible beneath this hardihood. Effrontery is a disgrace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36829:Nothing could be more melancholy than to see her sport about the room,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36830:and, so to speak, flit with the movements of a bird which is frightened
tests/les_miserables.txt:36831:by the daylight, or which has broken its wing. One felt that under
tests/les_miserables.txt:36832:other conditions of education and destiny, the gay and over-free mien
tests/les_miserables.txt:36833:of this young girl might have turned out sweet and charming. Never,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36834:even among animals, does the creature born to be a dove change into an
tests/les_miserables.txt:36837:Marius reflected, and allowed her to have her way.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36839:She approached the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36844:A flash pierced her glassy eye. She resumed, and her accent expressed
tests/les_miserables.txt:36845:the happiness which she felt in boasting of something, to which no
tests/les_miserables.txt:36846:human creature is insensible:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36851:She eagerly seized a book which lay open on the table, and read with
tests/les_miserables.txt:36852:tolerable fluency:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36854:“—General Bauduin received orders to take the château of Hougomont
tests/les_miserables.txt:36855:which stands in the middle of the plain of Waterloo, with five
tests/les_miserables.txt:36866:She laid down the book, caught up a pen, and exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36877:which lay in the middle of the table: “The bobbies are here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36882:“There are no faults of orthography. You can look. We have received an
tests/les_miserables.txt:36883:education, my sister and I. We have not always been as we are now. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:36888:saying, with an intonation which contained every form of anguish,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36889:stifled by every form of cynicism:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36897:Pas de fricot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36899:Pas de tricot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36903:    Jacquot!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36907:I am cold, mother.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36908:I have no clothes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36912:    Jacquot!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36915:She had hardly finished this couplet, when she exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36918:brother who is a friend of the artists, and who gives me tickets
tests/les_miserables.txt:36919:sometimes. But I don’t like the benches in the galleries. One is
tests/les_miserables.txt:36920:cramped and uncomfortable there. There are rough people there
tests/les_miserables.txt:36924:Then she scrutinized Marius, assumed a singular air and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36929:And at the same moment the same idea occurred to them both, and made
tests/les_miserables.txt:36932:meet you here on the staircase, and then I often see you going to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36933:person named Father Mabeuf who lives in the direction of Austerlitz,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36935:becoming to you to have your hair tumbled thus.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36938:She tried to render her voice soft, but only succeeded in making it
tests/les_miserables.txt:36944:“Mademoiselle,” said he, with his cool gravity, “I have here a package
tests/les_miserables.txt:36945:which belongs to you, I think. Permit me to return it to you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36948:And he held out the envelope containing the four letters.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36950:She clapped her hands and exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:36955:Then she eagerly seized the package and opened the envelope, saying as
tests/les_miserables.txt:36961:brat of a sister of mine who was so stupid. When we got home, we could
tests/les_miserables.txt:36964:said that we had carried the letters to the proper persons, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:36967:it was you that we jostled as we passed last night. We couldn’t see. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:36973:benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:36977:way, this is his hour. I’ll go and carry it to him. Perhaps he will
tests/les_miserables.txt:36985:our breakfast of yesterday, our dinner of to-day, and all that at once,
tests/les_miserables.txt:36990:This reminded Marius of the wretched girl’s errand to himself. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:36991:fumbled in his waistcoat pocket, and found nothing there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36993:The young girl went on, and seemed to have no consciousness of Marius’
tests/les_miserables.txt:36994:presence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36996:“I often go off in the evening. Sometimes I don’t come home again. Last
tests/les_miserables.txt:36997:winter, before we came here, we lived under the arches of the bridges.
tests/les_miserables.txt:36998:We huddled together to keep from freezing. My little sister cried. How
tests/les_miserables.txt:36999:melancholy the water is! When I thought of drowning myself, I said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37000:myself: ‘No, it’s too cold.’ I go out alone, whenever I choose, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:37001:sometimes sleep in the ditches. Do you know, at night, when I walk
tests/les_miserables.txt:37003:black and as big as Notre Dame, I fancy that the white walls are the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37008:spinning-machines, and I don’t know what all. I think people are
tests/les_miserables.txt:37015:By dint of searching and ransacking his pockets, Marius had finally
tests/les_miserables.txt:37016:collected five francs sixteen sous. This was all he owned in the world
tests/les_miserables.txt:37019:handed the five francs to the young girl.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37021:She seized the coin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37027:avalanches of slang in her brain, she went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37029:“Five francs! the shiner! a monarch! in this hole! Ain’t this fine!
tests/les_miserables.txt:37035:She pulled her chemise up on her shoulders, made a low bow to Marius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37041:As she passed, she caught sight of a dry crust of bread on the commode,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37042:which was moulding there amid the dust; she flung herself upon it and
tests/les_miserables.txt:37057:distress, but he now perceived that he had not known real misery. True
tests/les_miserables.txt:37058:misery he had but just had a view of. It was its spectre which had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:37059:passed before his eyes. In fact, he who has only beheld the misery of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37062:misery of the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37064:When a man has reached his last extremity, he has reached his last
tests/les_miserables.txt:37065:resources at the same time. Woe to the defenceless beings who surround
tests/les_miserables.txt:37066:him! Work, wages, bread, fire, courage, good will, all fail him
tests/les_miserables.txt:37068:light within; in these shadows man encounters the feebleness of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37069:woman and the child, and bends them violently to ignominy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37071:Then all horrors become possible. Despair is surrounded with fragile
tests/les_miserables.txt:37072:partitions which all open on either vice or crime.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37074:Health, youth, honor, all the shy delicacies of the young body, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37076:in sinister wise by that fumbling which seeks resources, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:37077:encounters opprobrium, and which accommodates itself to it. Fathers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37078:mothers, children, brothers, sisters, men, women, daughters, adhere and
tests/les_miserables.txt:37079:become incorporated, almost like a mineral formation, in that dusky
tests/les_miserables.txt:37080:promiscuousness of sexes, relationships, ages, infamies, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:37081:innocences. They crouch, back to back, in a sort of hut of fate. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:37082:exchange woe-begone glances. Oh, the unfortunate wretches! How pale
tests/les_miserables.txt:37083:they are! How cold they are! It seems as though they dwelt in a planet
tests/les_miserables.txt:37084:much further from the sun than ours.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37089:Marius almost reproached himself for the preoccupations of reverie and
tests/les_miserables.txt:37090:passion which had prevented his bestowing a glance on his neighbors up
tests/les_miserables.txt:37091:to that day. The payment of their rent had been a mechanical movement,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37092:which any one would have yielded to; but he, Marius, should have done
tests/les_miserables.txt:37096:last link of the human race which they touched, he heard them live, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:37099:of the wall, he heard them go, and come, and speak, and he did not even
tests/les_miserables.txt:37102:radiances, to loves in the air, to follies; and all the while, human
tests/les_miserables.txt:37103:creatures, his brothers in Jesus Christ, his brothers in the people,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37106:who was less chimerical and more attentive, any ordinary and charitable
tests/les_miserables.txt:37107:man, evidently their indigence would have been noticed, their signals
tests/les_miserables.txt:37108:of distress would have been perceived, and they would have been taken
tests/les_miserables.txt:37109:hold of and rescued! They appeared very corrupt and very depraved, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:37110:doubt, very vile, very odious even; but those who fall without becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:37112:the infamous unite and are confounded in a single word, a fatal word,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37113:_the miserable_; whose fault is this? And then should not the charity
tests/les_miserables.txt:37116:While reading himself this moral lesson, for there were occasions on
tests/les_miserables.txt:37117:which Marius, like all truly honest hearts, was his own pedagogue and
tests/les_miserables.txt:37118:scolded himself more than he deserved, he stared at the wall which
tests/les_miserables.txt:37120:gaze, full of pity, penetrate that partition and warm these wretched
tests/les_miserables.txt:37123:voices and words to be clearly distinguished. Only a man as dreamy as
tests/les_miserables.txt:37124:Marius could have failed to perceive this long before. There was no
tests/les_miserables.txt:37126:that of Marius; the coarse construction was visible in its nakedness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37127:Marius examined the partition, almost unconsciously; sometimes reverie
tests/les_miserables.txt:37128:examines, observes, and scrutinizes as thought would. All at once he
tests/les_miserables.txt:37129:sprang up; he had just perceived, near the top, close to the ceiling, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37130:triangular hole, which resulted from the space between three lathes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37131:The plaster which should have filled this cavity was missing, and by
tests/les_miserables.txt:37132:mounting on the commode, a view could be had through this aperture into
tests/les_miserables.txt:37133:the Jondrettes’ attic. Commiseration has, and should have, its
tests/les_miserables.txt:37134:curiosity. This aperture formed a sort of peep-hole. It is permissible
tests/les_miserables.txt:37135:to gaze at misfortune like a traitor in order to succor it.27
tests/les_miserables.txt:37138:Marius, “and in what condition they are.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37141:He climbed upon the commode, put his eye to the crevice, and looked.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37149:Cities, like forests, have their caverns in which all the most wicked
tests/les_miserables.txt:37150:and formidable creatures which they contain conceal themselves. Only,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37151:in cities, that which thus conceals itself is ferocious, unclean, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:37152:petty, that is to say, ugly; in forests, that which conceals itself is
tests/les_miserables.txt:37153:ferocious, savage, and grand, that is to say, beautiful. Taking one
tests/les_miserables.txt:37159:Marius was poor, and his chamber was poverty-stricken, but as his
tests/les_miserables.txt:37160:poverty was noble, his garret was neat. The den upon which his eye now
tests/les_miserables.txt:37161:rested was abject, dirty, fetid, pestiferous, mean, sordid. The only
tests/les_miserables.txt:37162:furniture consisted of a straw chair, an infirm table, some old bits of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37163:crockery, and in two of the corners, two indescribable pallets; all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37166:to make the face of a man appear like the face of a phantom. The walls
tests/les_miserables.txt:37167:had a leprous aspect, and were covered with seams and scars, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37169:from them. Obscene sketches roughly sketched with charcoal could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:37172:The chamber which Marius occupied had a dilapidated brick pavement;
tests/les_miserables.txt:37174:directly on the antique plaster of the hovel, which had grown black
tests/les_miserables.txt:37175:under the long-continued pressure of feet. Upon this uneven floor,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37176:where the dirt seemed to be fairly incrusted, and which possessed but
tests/les_miserables.txt:37177:one virginity, that of the broom, were capriciously grouped
tests/les_miserables.txt:37178:constellations of old shoes, socks, and repulsive rags; however, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:37179:room had a fireplace, so it was let for forty francs a year. There was
tests/les_miserables.txt:37180:every sort of thing in that fireplace, a brazier, a pot, broken boards,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37181:rags suspended from nails, a bird-cage, ashes, and even a little fire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37182:Two brands were smouldering there in a melancholy way.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37184:One thing which added still more to the horrors of this garret was,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37185:that it was large. It had projections and angles and black holes, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37186:lower sides of roofs, bays, and promontories. Hence horrible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37188:fist, wood-lice as large as one’s foot, and perhaps even—who
tests/les_miserables.txt:37192:end of each touched the fireplace and faced Marius. In a corner near
tests/les_miserables.txt:37193:the aperture through which Marius was gazing, a colored engraving in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37194:black frame was suspended to a nail on the wall, and at its bottom, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:37195:large letters, was the inscription: THE DREAM. This represented a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37196:sleeping woman, and a child, also asleep, the child on the woman’s lap,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37197:an eagle in a cloud, with a crown in his beak, and the woman thrusting
tests/les_miserables.txt:37198:the crown away from the child’s head, without awaking the latter; in
tests/les_miserables.txt:37199:the background, Napoleon in a glory, leaning on a very blue column with
tests/les_miserables.txt:37200:a yellow capital ornamented with this inscription:
tests/les_miserables.txt:37209:Beneath this frame, a sort of wooden panel, which was no longer than it
tests/les_miserables.txt:37211:the wall. It had the appearance of a picture with its face turned to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37213:pier-glass detached from a wall and lying forgotten there while waiting
tests/les_miserables.txt:37216:Near the table, upon which Marius descried a pen, ink, and paper, sat a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37218:cunning, cruel, and uneasy air; a hideous scoundrel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37222:rendering each other mutually hideous and complementing each other; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37226:This man had a long gray beard. He was clad in a woman’s chemise, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:37228:to be seen. Beneath this chemise, muddy trousers and boots through
tests/les_miserables.txt:37229:which his toes projected were visible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37232:hovel, but there was still tobacco.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37234:He was writing probably some more letters like those which Marius had
tests/les_miserables.txt:37237:On the corner of the table lay an ancient, dilapidated, reddish volume,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37238:and the size, which was the antique 12mo of reading-rooms, betrayed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37239:romance. On the cover sprawled the following title, printed in large
tests/les_miserables.txt:37240:capitals:
tests/les_miserables.txt:37250:at Père-Lachaise! The great, those who are rich, are up above, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37251:acacia alley, which is paved. They can reach it in a carriage. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:37253:down below, where the mud is up to your knees, in the damp places. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:37254:are put there so that they will decay the sooner! You cannot go to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:37261:“Oh! I could eat the whole world!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37265:crouching near the fireplace on her bare heels.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37267:She, too, was clad only in a chemise and a knitted petticoat patched
tests/les_miserables.txt:37268:with bits of old cloth. A coarse linen apron concealed the half of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:37269:petticoat. Although this woman was doubled up and bent together, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:37270:could be seen that she was of very lofty stature. She was a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37272:which was turning gray, and which she thrust back from time to time,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37276:other, and probably a volume of the same romance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37278:On one of the pallets, Marius caught a glimpse of a sort of tall pale
tests/les_miserables.txt:37282:No doubt the younger sister of the one who had come to his room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37284:She seemed to be eleven or twelve years of age. On closer scrutiny it
tests/les_miserables.txt:37285:was evident that she really was fourteen. She was the child who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:37289:She was of that puny sort which remains backward for a long time, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:37290:suddenly starts up rapidly. It is indigence which produces these
tests/les_miserables.txt:37291:melancholy human plants. These creatures have neither childhood nor
tests/les_miserables.txt:37297:At this moment, this being had the air of a child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37299:Moreover, no trace of work was revealed in that dwelling; no
tests/les_miserables.txt:37300:handicraft, no spinning-wheel, not a tool. In one corner lay some
tests/les_miserables.txt:37301:ironmongery of dubious aspect. It was the dull listlessness which
tests/les_miserables.txt:37302:follows despair and precedes the death agony.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37305:the interior of a tomb, for the human soul could be felt fluttering
tests/les_miserables.txt:37306:there, and life was palpitating there. The garret, the cellar, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37307:lowly ditch where certain indigent wretches crawl at the very bottom of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37308:the social edifice, is not exactly the sepulchre, but only its
tests/les_miserables.txt:37309:antechamber; but, as the wealthy display their greatest magnificence at
tests/les_miserables.txt:37310:the entrance of their palaces, it seems that death, which stands
tests/les_miserables.txt:37311:directly side by side with them, places its greatest miseries in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:37314:The man held his peace, the woman spoke no word, the young girl did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:37315:even seem to breathe. The scratching of the pen on the paper was
tests/les_miserables.txt:37318:The man grumbled, without pausing in his writing. “Canaille! canaille!
tests/les_miserables.txt:37319:everybody is canaille!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37322:This variation to Solomon’s exclamation elicited a sigh from the woman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37328:Bodies press close to each other in misery, as in cold, but hearts draw
tests/les_miserables.txt:37329:apart. This woman must have loved this man, to all appearance, judging
tests/les_miserables.txt:37331:reciprocal reproaches of the horrible distress which weighed on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37332:whole group, this had become extinct. There no longer existed in her
tests/les_miserables.txt:37333:anything more than the ashes of affection for her husband.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37334:Nevertheless, caressing appellations had survived, as is often the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37335:case. She called him: _My dear, my little friend, my good man_, etc.,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37346:Marius, with a load upon his breast, was on the point of descending
tests/les_miserables.txt:37347:from the species of observatory which he had improvised, when a sound
tests/les_miserables.txt:37348:attracted his attention and caused him to remain at his post.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37350:The door of the attic had just burst open abruptly. The eldest girl
tests/les_miserables.txt:37351:made her appearance on the threshold. On her feet, she had large,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37352:coarse, men’s shoes, bespattered with mud, which had splashed even to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37353:her red ankles, and she was wrapped in an old mantle which hung in
tests/les_miserables.txt:37356:more pity, and had picked it up again on emerging. She entered, pushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:37357:the door to behind her, paused to take breath, for she was completely
tests/les_miserables.txt:37358:breathless, then exclaimed with an expression of triumph and joy:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37360:“He is coming!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37377:“From the church of Saint-Jacques?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37389:“And he is coming?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37401:“There, truly, he is coming?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37404:“He is coming in a fiacre.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37407:“In a fiacre. He is Rothschild.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37412:“How are you sure? If he is coming in a fiacre, how is it that you
tests/les_miserables.txt:37414:that it was the last door at the end of the corridor, on the right? If
tests/les_miserables.txt:37415:he only does not make a mistake! So you found him at the church? Did he
tests/les_miserables.txt:37420:here: I entered the church, he was in his usual place, I made him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37421:reverence, and I handed him the letter; he read it and said to me:
tests/les_miserables.txt:37422:‘Where do you live, my child?’ I said: ‘Monsieur, I will show you.’ He
tests/les_miserables.txt:37423:said to me: ‘No, give me your address, my daughter has some purchases
tests/les_miserables.txt:37424:to make, I will take a carriage and reach your house at the same time
tests/les_miserables.txt:37427:mind, I will come.’ When the mass was finished, I watched him leave the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37428:church with his daughter, and I saw them enter a carriage. I certainly
tests/les_miserables.txt:37429:did tell him the last door in the corridor, on the right.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37432:“And what makes you think that he will come?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37435:“I have just seen the fiacre turn into the Rue Petit-Banquier. That is
tests/les_miserables.txt:37439:“How do you know that it was the same fiacre?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37442:“Because I took notice of the number, so there!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37451:“Good, you are a clever girl.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37454:The girl stared boldly at her father, and showing the shoes which she
tests/les_miserables.txt:37457:“A clever girl, possibly; but I tell you I won’t put these shoes on
tests/les_miserables.txt:37458:again, and that I won’t, for the sake of my health, in the first place,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37459:and for the sake of cleanliness, in the next. I don’t know anything
tests/les_miserables.txt:37460:more irritating than shoes that squelch, and go _ghi, ghi, ghi,_ the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37464:“You are right,” said her father, in a sweet tone which contrasted with
tests/les_miserables.txt:37466:churches, for poor people must have shoes to do that. One cannot go
tests/les_miserables.txt:37469:Then, returning to the subject which absorbed him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37471:“So you are sure that he will come?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37476:The man started up. A sort of illumination appeared on his countenance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37478:“Wife!” he exclaimed, “you hear. Here is the philanthropist. Extinguish
tests/les_miserables.txt:37484:The father, with the agility of an acrobat, seized a broken-nosed jug
tests/les_miserables.txt:37485:which stood on the chimney, and flung the water on the brands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37489:“Here you! Pull the straw off that chair!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37494:He seized the chair, and with one kick he rendered it seatless. His leg
tests/les_miserables.txt:37499:“Is it cold?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37502:“Very cold. It is snowing.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37506:window, and shouted to her in a thundering voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37508:“Quick! get off that bed, you lazy thing! will you never do anything?
tests/les_miserables.txt:37516:The child stood still in bewilderment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37521:The child, with a sort of terrified obedience, rose on tiptoe, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:37522:struck a pane with her fist. The glass broke and fell with a loud
tests/les_miserables.txt:37523:clatter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37527:He was grave and abrupt. His glance swept rapidly over all the crannies
tests/les_miserables.txt:37533:dull, slow, languid voice, whence her words seemed to emerge in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37534:congealed state:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37544:In the meantime, a sob became audible in one corner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37546:“What’s that?” cried the father.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37549:corner in which she was cowering. She had wounded herself while
tests/les_miserables.txt:37553:It was now the mother’s turn to start up and exclaim:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37555:“Just see there! What follies you commit! She has cut herself breaking
tests/les_miserables.txt:37559:“So much the better!” said the man. “I foresaw that.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37562:“What? So much the better?” retorted his wife.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37564:“Peace!” replied the father, “I suppress the liberty of the press.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37567:Then tearing the woman’s chemise which he was wearing, he made a strip
tests/les_miserables.txt:37568:of cloth with which he hastily swathed the little girl’s bleeding
tests/les_miserables.txt:37572:chemise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37574:“And the chemise too,” said he, “this has a good appearance.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37577:An icy breeze whistled through the window and entered the room. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:37580:the snow could be seen falling. The snow promised by the Candlemas sun
tests/les_miserables.txt:37581:of the preceding day had actually come.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37583:The father cast a glance about him as though to make sure that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:37585:wet brands in such a manner as to entirely conceal them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37587:Then drawing himself up and leaning against the chimney-piece:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37589:“Now,” said he, “we can receive the philanthropist.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37598:The big girl approached and laid her hand in her father’s.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37600:“Feel how cold I am,” said she.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37602:“Bah!” replied the father, “I am much colder than that.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37605:The mother exclaimed impetuously:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37613:The mother, being eyed after a certain fashion, held her tongue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37615:Silence reigned for a moment in the hovel. The elder girl was removing
tests/les_miserables.txt:37616:the mud from the bottom of her mantle, with a careless air; her younger
tests/les_miserables.txt:37617:sister continued to sob; the mother had taken the latter’s head between
tests/les_miserables.txt:37618:her hands, and was covering it with kisses, whispering to her the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37621:“My treasure, I entreat you, it is nothing of consequence, don’t cry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37625:“No!” exclaimed the father, “quite the contrary! sob! sob! that’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:37631:“There now! He is not coming! What if he were not to come! I shall have
tests/les_miserables.txt:37632:extinguished my fire, wrecked my chair, torn my shirt, and broken my
tests/les_miserables.txt:37636:“And wounded the child!” murmured the mother.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37638:“Do you know,” went on the father, “that it’s beastly cold in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:37639:devil’s garret! What if that man should not come! Oh! See there, you!
tests/les_miserables.txt:37642:jubilation, enthusiasm, and satisfaction I could strangle all those
tests/les_miserables.txt:37643:rich folks! all those rich folks! These men who pretend to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:37644:charitable, who put on airs, who go to mass, who make presents to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37645:priesthood, _preachy, preachy_, in their skullcaps, and who think
tests/les_miserables.txt:37646:themselves above us, and who come for the purpose of humiliating us,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37647:and to bring us ‘clothes,’ as they say! old duds that are not worth
tests/les_miserables.txt:37648:four sous! And bread! That’s not what I want, pack of rascals that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:37649:are, it’s money! Ah! money! Never! Because they say that we would go
tests/les_miserables.txt:37652:They never could have become rich otherwise! Oh! Society ought to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:37653:grasped by the four corners of the cloth and tossed into the air, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:37655:have anything, and there would be that much gained! But what is that
tests/les_miserables.txt:37656:blockhead of a benevolent gentleman doing? Will he come? Perhaps the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37660:At that moment there came a light tap at the door, the man rushed to it
tests/les_miserables.txt:37661:and opened it, exclaiming, amid profound bows and smiles of adoration:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37663:“Enter, sir! Deign to enter, most respected benefactor, and your
tests/les_miserables.txt:37664:charming young lady, also.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37667:A man of ripe age and a young girl made their appearance on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37668:threshold of the attic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37675:Whoever has loved knows all the radiant meanings contained in those
tests/les_miserables.txt:37678:It was certainly she. Marius could hardly distinguish her through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37679:luminous vapor which had suddenly spread before his eyes. It was that
tests/les_miserables.txt:37680:sweet, absent being, that star which had beamed upon him for six
tests/les_miserables.txt:37682:face which had created night by its departure. The vision had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:37683:eclipsed, now it reappeared.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37685:It reappeared in that gloom, in that garret, in that misshapen attic,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37694:She was the same as ever, only a little pale; her delicate face was
tests/les_miserables.txt:37695:framed in a bonnet of violet velvet, her figure was concealed beneath a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37696:pelisse of black satin. Beneath her long dress, a glimpse could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:37697:caught of her tiny foot shod in a silken boot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37699:She was still accompanied by M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37702:bulky parcel on the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37706:charming, happy face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37714:The hovel was so dark, that people coming from without felt on entering
tests/les_miserables.txt:37715:it the effect produced on entering a cellar. The two newcomers
tests/les_miserables.txt:37716:advanced, therefore, with a certain hesitation, being hardly able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37717:distinguish the vague forms surrounding them, while they could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:37718:clearly seen and scrutinized by the eyes of the inhabitants of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37719:garret, who were accustomed to this twilight.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37721:M. Leblanc approached, with his sad but kindly look, and said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37724:“Monsieur, in this package you will find some new clothes and some
tests/les_miserables.txt:37725:woollen stockings and blankets.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37728:“Our angelic benefactor overwhelms us,” said Jondrette, bowing to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37733:in a low and rapid voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37736:how was the letter to that old blockhead signed?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37741:“The dramatic artist, good!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37744:It was lucky for Jondrette, that this had occurred to him, for at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37745:very moment, M. Leblanc turned to him, and said to him with the air of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37746:a person who is seeking to recall a name:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37751:“Fabantou,” replied Jondrette quickly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37756:“Dramatic artist, sir, and one who has had some success.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37759:Here Jondrette evidently judged the moment propitious for capturing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37760:“philanthropist.” He exclaimed with an accent which smacked at the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:37762:the mendicant on the highway:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37765:on me—Alas! Now it is misfortune’s turn. You see, my benefactor, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:37766:bread, no fire. My poor babes have no fire! My only chair has no seat!
tests/les_miserables.txt:37767:A broken pane! And in such weather! My spouse in bed! Ill!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37770:“Poor woman!” said M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37772:“My child wounded!” added Jondrette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37774:The child, diverted by the arrival of the strangers, had fallen to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37775:contemplating “the young lady,” and had ceased to sob.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37777:“Cry! bawl!” said Jondrette to her in a low voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37779:At the same time he pinched her sore hand. All this was done with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37784:The adorable young girl, whom Marius, in his heart, called “his
tests/les_miserables.txt:37785:Ursule,” approached her hastily.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37787:“Poor, dear child!” said she.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37790:wrist! It came through an accident while working at a machine to earn
tests/les_miserables.txt:37791:six sous a day. It may be necessary to cut off her arm.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37799:“Alas! yes, my benefactor!” replied the father.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37801:For several minutes, Jondrette had been scrutinizing “the benefactor”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37803:attentively, as though seeking to summon up his recollections. All at
tests/les_miserables.txt:37804:once, profiting by a moment when the newcomers were questioning the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37805:child with interest as to her injured hand, he passed near his wife,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37806:who lay in her bed with a stupid and dejected air, and said to her in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37812:Then, turning to M. Leblanc, and continuing his lamentations:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37814:“You see, sir! All the clothing that I have is my wife’s chemise! And
tests/les_miserables.txt:37815:all torn at that! In the depths of winter! I can’t go out for lack of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37816:coat. If I had a coat of any sort, I would go and see Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:37819:the provinces. I shared her laurels. Célimène would come to my succor,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37822:injured, not a sou! My wife suffers from fits of suffocation. It comes
tests/les_miserables.txt:37823:from her age, and besides, her nervous system is affected. She ought to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37824:have assistance, and my daughter also! But the doctor! But the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37825:apothecary! How am I to pay them? I would kneel to a penny, sir! Such
tests/les_miserables.txt:37826:is the condition to which the arts are reduced. And do you know, my
tests/les_miserables.txt:37827:charming young lady, and you, my generous protector, do you know, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:37828:who breathe forth virtue and goodness, and who perfume that church
tests/les_miserables.txt:37830:have brought up my children religiously, sir. I did not want them to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37831:take to the theatre. Ah! the hussies! If I catch them tripping! I do
tests/les_miserables.txt:37834:unhappy wretches who begin by having no family, and end by espousing
tests/les_miserables.txt:37835:the public. One is Mamselle Nobody, and one becomes Madame Everybody.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37836:Deuce take it! None of that in the Fabantou family! I mean to bring
tests/les_miserables.txt:37837:them up virtuously, and they shall be honest, and nice, and believe in
tests/les_miserables.txt:37838:God, by the sacred name! Well, sir, my worthy sir, do you know what is
tests/les_miserables.txt:37840:fatal day, the last day of grace allowed me by my landlord; if by this
tests/les_miserables.txt:37842:spouse with her fever, my child with her wound,—we shall all four be
tests/les_miserables.txt:37845:quarters—a whole year! that is to say, sixty francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37848:Jondrette lied. Four quarters would have amounted to only forty francs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37849:and he could not owe four, because six months had not elapsed since
tests/les_miserables.txt:37852:M. Leblanc drew five francs from his pocket and threw them on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37857:“The scoundrel! What does he think I can do with his five francs? That
tests/les_miserables.txt:37858:won’t pay me for my chair and pane of glass! That’s what comes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37859:incurring expenses!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37862:In the meanwhile, M. Leblanc had removed the large brown great-coat
tests/les_miserables.txt:37863:which he wore over his blue coat, and had thrown it over the back of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37864:the chair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37866:“Monsieur Fabantou,” he said, “these five francs are all that I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:37871:Jondrette’s face lighted up with a strange expression. He replied
tests/les_miserables.txt:37872:vivaciously:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37874:“Yes, respected sir. At eight o’clock, I must be at my landlord’s.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37877:“I will be here at six, and I will fetch you the sixty francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37880:“My benefactor!” exclaimed Jondrette, overwhelmed. And he added, in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37884:M. Leblanc had taken the arm of the young girl, once more, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:37889:“Six o’clock?” said Jondrette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37891:“Six o’clock precisely.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37894:At that moment, the overcoat lying on the chair caught the eye of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37897:“You are forgetting your coat, sir,” said she.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37899:Jondrette darted an annihilating look at his daughter, accompanied by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37902:M. Leblanc turned back and said, with a smile:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37907:“O my protector!” said Jondrette, “my august benefactor, I melt into
tests/les_miserables.txt:37908:tears! Permit me to accompany you to your carriage.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37911:“If you come out,” answered M. Leblanc, “put on this coat. It really is
tests/les_miserables.txt:37912:very cold.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:37915:Jondrette did not need to be told twice. He hastily donned the brown
tests/les_miserables.txt:37916:great-coat. And all three went out, Jondrette preceding the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:37925:Marius had lost nothing of this entire scene, and yet, in reality, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:37929:had lived that life of ecstasy which suspends material perceptions and
tests/les_miserables.txt:37930:precipitates the whole soul on a single point. He contemplated, not
tests/les_miserables.txt:37931:that girl, but that light which wore a satin pelisse and a velvet
tests/les_miserables.txt:37935:While the young girl was engaged in opening the package, unfolding the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37936:clothing and the blankets, questioning the sick mother kindly, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37937:little injured girl tenderly, he watched her every movement, he sought
tests/les_miserables.txt:37938:to catch her words. He knew her eyes, her brow, her beauty, her form,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37939:her walk, he did not know the sound of her voice. He had once fancied
tests/les_miserables.txt:37940:that he had caught a few words at the Luxembourg, but he was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:37941:absolutely sure of the fact. He would have given ten years of his life
tests/les_miserables.txt:37943:that music. But everything was drowned in the lamentable exclamations
tests/les_miserables.txt:37944:and trumpet bursts of Jondrette. This added a touch of genuine wrath to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37945:Marius’ ecstasy. He devoured her with his eyes. He could not believe
tests/les_miserables.txt:37946:that it really was that divine creature whom he saw in the midst of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37947:those vile creatures in that monstrous lair. It seemed to him that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:37951:cling to her trace, not to quit her until he learned where she lived,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37952:not to lose her again, at least, after having so miraculously
tests/les_miserables.txt:37953:re-discovered her. He leaped down from the commode and seized his hat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37954:As he laid his hand on the lock of the door, and was on the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37955:opening it, a sudden reflection caused him to pause. The corridor was
tests/les_miserables.txt:37956:long, the staircase steep, Jondrette was talkative, M. Leblanc had, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:37957:doubt, not yet regained his carriage; if, on turning round in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37958:corridor, or on the staircase, he were to catch sight of him, Marius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:37960:escape from him again, and this time it would be final. What was he to
tests/les_miserables.txt:37961:do? Should he wait a little? But while he was waiting, the carriage
tests/les_miserables.txt:37962:might drive off. Marius was perplexed. At last he accepted the risk and
tests/les_miserables.txt:37965:There was no one in the corridor. He hastened to the stairs. There was
tests/les_miserables.txt:37966:no one on the staircase. He descended in all haste, and reached the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37967:boulevard in time to see a fiacre turning the corner of the Rue du
tests/les_miserables.txt:37968:Petit-Banquier, on its way back to Paris.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37970:Marius rushed headlong in that direction. On arriving at the angle of
tests/les_miserables.txt:37971:the boulevard, he caught sight of the fiacre again, rapidly descending
tests/les_miserables.txt:37972:the Rue Mouffetard; the carriage was already a long way off, and there
tests/les_miserables.txt:37974:besides, the people in the carriage would assuredly notice an
tests/les_miserables.txt:37975:individual running at full speed in pursuit of a fiacre, and the father
tests/les_miserables.txt:37976:would recognize him. At that moment, wonderful and unprecedented good
tests/les_miserables.txt:37977:luck, Marius perceived an empty cab passing along the boulevard. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:37978:was but one thing to be done, to jump into this cab and follow the
tests/les_miserables.txt:37979:fiacre. That was sure, efficacious, and free from danger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37981:Marius made the driver a sign to halt, and called to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:37986:Marius wore no cravat, he had on his working-coat, which was destitute
tests/les_miserables.txt:37994:“Pay in advance,” said the coachman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37996:Marius recollected that he had but sixteen sous about him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:37998:“How much?” he demanded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38009:Marius stared at the retreating cabriolet with a bewildered air. For
tests/les_miserables.txt:38010:the lack of four and twenty sous, he was losing his joy, his happiness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38011:his love! He had seen, and he was becoming blind again. He reflected
tests/les_miserables.txt:38012:bitterly, and it must be confessed, with profound regret, on the five
tests/les_miserables.txt:38013:francs which he had bestowed, that very morning, on that miserable
tests/les_miserables.txt:38014:girl. If he had had those five francs, he would have been saved, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:38016:darkness, he would have made his escape from isolation and spleen, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:38017:his widowed state; he might have re-knotted the black thread of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:38018:destiny to that beautiful golden thread, which had just floated before
tests/les_miserables.txt:38019:his eyes and had broken at the same instant, once more! He returned to
tests/les_miserables.txt:38022:He might have told himself that M. Leblanc had promised to return in
tests/les_miserables.txt:38024:skilfully, so that he might follow him on that occasion; but, in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:38025:contemplation, it is doubtful whether he had heard this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38027:As he was on the point of mounting the staircase, he perceived, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38030:great-coat, engaged in conversation with one of those men of
tests/les_miserables.txt:38031:disquieting aspect who have been dubbed by common consent, _prowlers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:38032:the barriers_; people of equivocal face, of suspicious monologues, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:38034:daytime, which suggests the supposition that they work by night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38036:These two men, standing there motionless and in conversation, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38037:snow which was falling in whirlwinds, formed a group that a policeman
tests/les_miserables.txt:38038:would surely have observed, but which Marius hardly noticed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38040:Still, in spite of his mournful preoccupation, he could not refrain
tests/les_miserables.txt:38042:Jondrette was talking resembled a certain Panchaud, alias Printanier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38043:alias Bigrenaille, whom Courfeyrac had once pointed out to him as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38044:very dangerous nocturnal roamer. This man’s name the reader has learned
tests/les_miserables.txt:38045:in the preceding book. This Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias
tests/les_miserables.txt:38046:Bigrenaille, figured later on in many criminal trials, and became a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38047:notorious rascal. He was at that time only a famous rascal. To-day he
tests/les_miserables.txt:38049:at the head of a school towards the end of the last reign. And in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38051:whispers, he was discussed at La Force in the Fosse-aux-Lions. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:38052:might even, in that prison, precisely at the spot where the sewer which
tests/les_miserables.txt:38053:served the unprecedented escape, in broad daylight, of thirty
tests/les_miserables.txt:38054:prisoners, in 1843, passes under the culvert, read his name, PANCHAUD,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38055:audaciously carved by his own hand on the wall of the sewer, during one
tests/les_miserables.txt:38056:of his attempts at flight. In 1832, the police already had their eye on
tests/les_miserables.txt:38065:Marius ascended the stairs of the hovel with slow steps; at the moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:38066:when he was about to re-enter his cell, he caught sight of the elder
tests/les_miserables.txt:38067:Jondrette girl following him through the corridor. The very sight of
tests/les_miserables.txt:38068:this girl was odious to him; it was she who had his five francs, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:38069:too late to demand them back, the cab was no longer there, the fiacre
tests/les_miserables.txt:38070:was far away. Moreover, she would not have given them back. As for
tests/les_miserables.txt:38071:questioning her about the residence of the persons who had just been
tests/les_miserables.txt:38072:there, that was useless; it was evident that she did not know, since
tests/les_miserables.txt:38074:gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38079:It did not close; he turned round and beheld a hand which held the door
tests/les_miserables.txt:38092:had the air of assurance which had characterized her that morning. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:38093:did not enter, but held back in the darkness of the corridor, where
tests/les_miserables.txt:38094:Marius could see her through the half-open door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38096:“Come now, will you answer?” cried Marius. “What do you want with me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38099:She raised her dull eyes, in which a sort of gleam seemed to flicker
tests/les_miserables.txt:38127:“Stop,” said she, “you are in the wrong. Although you are not rich, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:38130:want you to be grieved. What can be done for it? Can I be of any
tests/les_miserables.txt:38131:service? Employ me. I do not ask for your secrets, you need not tell
tests/les_miserables.txt:38133:you, since I help my father. When it is necessary to carry letters, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:38135:follow any one, I am of service. Well, you may assuredly tell me what
tests/les_miserables.txt:38137:sometimes it is enough if some one speaks to the persons, that suffices
tests/les_miserables.txt:38138:to let them understand matters, and everything comes right. Make use of
tests/les_miserables.txt:38142:An idea flashed across Marius’ mind. What branch does one disdain when
tests/les_miserables.txt:38151:“Oh yes, do call me _thou!_ I like that better.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38170:The Jondrette’s dull eyes had grown joyous, and they now became gloomy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38183:“That is to say,” she resumed quickly, “you do not know her, but you
tests/les_miserables.txt:38187:This _them_ which had turned into _her_ had something indescribably
tests/les_miserables.txt:38188:significant and bitter about it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38190:“Well, can you do it?” said Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38195:There was still a shade in the words “the beautiful lady” which
tests/les_miserables.txt:38220:door, which closed behind her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38224:He dropped into a chair, with his head and both elbows on his bed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38225:absorbed in thoughts which he could not grasp, and as though a prey to
tests/les_miserables.txt:38226:vertigo. All that had taken place since the morning, the appearance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:38227:the angel, her disappearance, what that creature had just said to him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38229:his brain confusedly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38231:All at once he was violently aroused from his reverie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38233:He heard the shrill, hard voice of Jondrette utter these words, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:38236:“I tell you that I am sure of it, and that I recognized him.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38239:Of whom was Jondrette speaking? Whom had he recognized? M. Leblanc? The
tests/les_miserables.txt:38241:to obtain in this abrupt and unexpected fashion all the information
tests/les_miserables.txt:38242:without which his life was so dark to him? Was he about to learn at
tests/les_miserables.txt:38244:was? Was the dense shadow which enwrapped them on the point of being
tests/les_miserables.txt:38247:He bounded rather than climbed upon his commode, and resumed his post
tests/les_miserables.txt:38258:Nothing in the aspect of the family was altered, except that the wife
tests/les_miserables.txt:38259:and daughters had levied on the package and put on woollen stockings
tests/les_miserables.txt:38260:and jackets. Two new blankets were thrown across the two beds.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38264:fireplace, the elder engaged in dressing the younger’s wounded hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38265:His wife had sunk back on the bed near the fireplace, with a face
tests/les_miserables.txt:38266:indicative of astonishment. Jondrette was pacing up and down the garret
tests/les_miserables.txt:38269:The woman, who seemed timid and overwhelmed with stupor in the presence
tests/les_miserables.txt:38275:“Sure! Eight years have passed! But I recognize him! Ah! I recognize
tests/les_miserables.txt:38276:him. I knew him at once! What! Didn’t it force itself on you?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38283:face, only older,—there are people who do not grow old, I don’t know
tests/les_miserables.txt:38284:how they manage it,—it is the very sound of his voice. He is better
tests/les_miserables.txt:38308:detained the elder by the arm, and said to her with a peculiar accent:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38310:“You will be here at five o’clock precisely. Both of you. I shall need
tests/les_miserables.txt:38316:On being left alone with his wife, Jondrette began to pace the room
tests/les_miserables.txt:38317:again, and made the tour of it two or three times in silence. Then he
tests/les_miserables.txt:38318:spent several minutes in tucking the lower part of the woman’s chemise
tests/les_miserables.txt:38319:which he wore into his trousers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38321:All at once, he turned to the female Jondrette, folded his arms and
tests/les_miserables.txt:38322:exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38330:Marius could not doubt that it was really she of whom they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:38335:straightened himself up and concluded aloud:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38344:No expression can reproduce the significance of the mother’s words.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38345:Surprise, rage, hate, wrath, were mingled and combined in one monstrous
tests/les_miserables.txt:38346:intonation. The pronunciation of a few words, the name, no doubt, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:38347:her husband had whispered in her ear, had sufficed to rouse this huge,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38348:somnolent woman, and from being repulsive she became terrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38350:“It is not possible!” she cried. “When I think that my daughters are
tests/les_miserables.txt:38351:going barefoot, and have not a gown to their backs! What! A satin
tests/les_miserables.txt:38353:francs’ worth of clothes! so that one would think she was a lady! No,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38354:you are mistaken! Why, in the first place, the other was hideous, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:38355:this one is not so bad-looking! She really is not bad-looking! It can’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:38363:blonde face and stared at the ceiling with a horrible expression. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:38369:like to kick her stomach in for her!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38374:clenched and drawn back. Then she fell back on the bed once more. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:38375:man paced to and fro and paid no attention to his female.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38377:After a silence lasting several minutes, he approached the female
tests/les_miserables.txt:38386:He answered in a low, curt voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38399:die-of-hunger-if-you-have-a-fire,-die-of-cold-if-you-have-bread! I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:38401:joking any longer, I don’t find it comic any more, I’ve had enough of
tests/les_miserables.txt:38402:puns, good God! no more farces, Eternal Father! I want to eat till I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:38404:I want to have my turn, so I do, come now! before I die! I want to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38415:He shook his head, winked, screwed up one eye, and raised his voice
tests/les_miserables.txt:38416:like a medical professor who is about to make a demonstration:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38421:“Hush!” muttered the woman, “not so loud! These are matters which must
tests/les_miserables.txt:38430:Nevertheless, by a sort of instinct, Jondrette lowered his voice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38431:although not sufficiently to prevent Marius hearing his words. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:38432:favorable circumstance, which enabled Marius not to lose a word of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:38433:conversation was the falling snow which deadened the sound of vehicles
tests/les_miserables.txt:38438:“Listen carefully. The Crœsus is caught, or as good as caught! That’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:38440:He will come here this evening at six o’clock. To bring sixty francs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38441:the rascal! Did you notice how I played that game on him, my sixty
tests/les_miserables.txt:38442:francs, my landlord, my fourth of February? I don’t even owe for one
tests/les_miserables.txt:38443:quarter! Isn’t he a fool! So he will come at six o’clock! That’s the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38445:dishes in the city. There’s not a soul in the house. The neighbor never
tests/les_miserables.txt:38446:comes home until eleven o’clock. The children shall stand on watch. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:38459:This was the first time Marius had seen him laugh. The laugh was cold
tests/les_miserables.txt:38462:Jondrette opened a cupboard near the fireplace, and drew from it an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:38463:cap, which he placed on his head, after brushing it with his sleeve.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38471:And with both fists thrust into the pockets of his trousers, he stood
tests/les_miserables.txt:38472:for a moment in thought, then exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38474:“Do you know, it’s mighty lucky, by the way, that he didn’t recognize
tests/les_miserables.txt:38475:me! If he had recognized me on his side, he would not have come back
tests/les_miserables.txt:38477:saved us! my romantic beard! my pretty little romantic beard!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38487:Then lapping his overcoat across his breast:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38490:devilish good thing in leaving it for me, the old scoundrel! If it
tests/les_miserables.txt:38491:hadn’t been for that, I couldn’t have gone out, and everything would
tests/les_miserables.txt:38495:And pulling his cap down over his eyes, he quitted the room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38498:the door opened again, and his savage but intelligent face made its
tests/les_miserables.txt:38499:appearance once more in the opening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38501:“I came near forgetting,” said he. “You are to have a brazier of
tests/les_miserables.txt:38502:charcoal ready.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38505:And he flung into his wife’s apron the five-franc piece which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38508:“A brazier of charcoal?” asked his wife.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38519:“That will come to thirty sous. With the rest I will buy something for
tests/les_miserables.txt:38529:“Don’t go and spend the hundred-sou piece.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38535:“Because I shall have to buy something, too.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38544:“How much shall you need?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38553:“Ah! yes, at the corner of a street; I can see the shop.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38556:“But tell me how much you will need for what you have to purchase?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38559:“Fifty sous—three francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38562:“There won’t be much left for dinner.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38571:At this word from his wife, Jondrette closed the door again, and this
tests/les_miserables.txt:38572:time, Marius heard his step die away in the corridor of the hovel, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:38573:descend the staircase rapidly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38575:At that moment, one o’clock struck from the church of Saint-Médard.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38584:Marius, dreamer as he was, was, as we have said, firm and energetic by
tests/les_miserables.txt:38586:him sympathy and compassion, had, perhaps, diminished the faculty for
tests/les_miserables.txt:38587:irritation, but had left intact the power of waxing indignant; he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:38589:upon a toad, but he crushed a viper. Now, it was into a hole of vipers
tests/les_miserables.txt:38590:that his glance had just been directed, it was a nest of monsters that
tests/les_miserables.txt:38593:“These wretches must be stamped upon,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38595:Not one of the enigmas which he had hoped to see solved had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:38596:elucidated; on the contrary, all of them had been rendered more dense,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38598:Luxembourg and the man whom he called M. Leblanc, except that Jondrette
tests/les_miserables.txt:38599:was acquainted with them. Athwart the mysterious words which had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:38600:uttered, the only thing of which he caught a distinct glimpse was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38601:fact that an ambush was in course of preparation, a dark but terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:38602:trap; that both of them were incurring great danger, she probably, her
tests/les_miserables.txt:38603:father certainly; that they must be saved; that the hideous plots of
tests/les_miserables.txt:38606:He scanned the female Jondrette for a moment. She had pulled an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:38607:sheet-iron stove from a corner, and she was rummaging among the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:38610:He descended from the commode as softly as possible, taking care not to
tests/les_miserables.txt:38612:and in the horror with which the Jondrettes had inspired him, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:38613:experienced a sort of joy at the idea that it might be granted to him
tests/les_miserables.txt:38614:perhaps to render a service to the one whom he loved.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38618:and had then plunged back again into the immense depths of Paris.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38619:Should he wait for M. Leblanc at the door that evening at six o’clock,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38621:and his men would see him on the watch, the spot was lonely, they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:38624:o’clock had just struck, the trap was to be sprung at six. Marius had
tests/les_miserables.txt:38629:He put on his decent coat, knotted a silk handkerchief round his neck,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38633:Moreover, the Jondrette woman continued to rummage among her old iron.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38635:Once outside of the house, he made for the Rue du Petit-Banquier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38637:He had almost reached the middle of this street, near a very low wall
tests/les_miserables.txt:38638:which a man can easily step over at certain points, and which abuts on
tests/les_miserables.txt:38639:a waste space, and was walking slowly, in consequence of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:38640:preoccupied condition, and the snow deadened the sound of his steps;
tests/les_miserables.txt:38641:all at once he heard voices talking very close by. He turned his head,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38643:daylight, and yet he distinctly heard voices.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38645:It occurred to him to glance over the wall which he was skirting.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38647:There, in fact, sat two men, flat on the snow, with their backs against
tests/les_miserables.txt:38655:By thrusting his head over the wall, Marius could hear their remarks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38659:“—With the assistance of Patron-Minette, it can’t fail.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38666:“It’s as good as a warrant for each one, of five hundred balls, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38667:worst that can happen is five years, six years, ten years at the most!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38672:“That’s a real thing. You can’t go against such things.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38675:“I tell you that the affair can’t go wrong,” resumed the long-haired
tests/les_miserables.txt:38679:Then they began to discuss a melodrama that they had seen on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38680:preceding evening at the Gaîté Theatre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38685:hidden behind that wall, and crouching in the snow, could not but bear
tests/les_miserables.txt:38686:some relation to Jondrette’s abominable projects. That must be _the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38689:He directed his course towards the faubourg Saint-Marceau and asked at
tests/les_miserables.txt:38690:the first shop he came to where he could find a commissary of police.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38692:He was directed to Rue de Pontoise, No. 14.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38699:On the way, he rendered justice to Providence. He reflected that had he
tests/les_miserables.txt:38700:not given his five francs to the Jondrette girl in the morning, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:38701:would have followed M. Leblanc’s fiacre, and consequently have remained
tests/les_miserables.txt:38702:ignorant of everything, and that there would have been no obstacle to
tests/les_miserables.txt:38703:the trap of the Jondrettes and that M. Leblanc would have been lost,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38712:On arriving at No. 14, Rue de Pontoise, he ascended to the first floor
tests/les_miserables.txt:38713:and inquired for the commissary of police.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38715:“The commissary of police is not here,” said a clerk; “but there is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:38716:inspector who takes his place. Would you like to speak to him? Are you
tests/les_miserables.txt:38722:The clerk introduced him into the commissary’s office. There stood a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38724:both hands the tails of a vast topcoat, with three collars. His face
tests/les_miserables.txt:38725:was square, with a thin, firm mouth, thick, gray, and very ferocious
tests/les_miserables.txt:38726:whiskers, and a look that was enough to turn your pockets inside out.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38727:Of that glance it might have been well said, not that it penetrated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38728:but that it searched.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38730:This man’s air was not much less ferocious nor less terrible than
tests/les_miserables.txt:38737:“Is this Monsieur le Commissaire de Police?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38752:“Then speak quick.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38755:This calm, abrupt man was both terrifying and reassuring at one and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38756:same time. He inspired fear and confidence. Marius related the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38757:adventure to him: That a person with whom he was not acquainted
tests/les_miserables.txt:38759:evening; that, as he occupied the room adjoining the den, he, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:38760:Pontmercy, a lawyer, had heard the whole plot through the partition;
tests/les_miserables.txt:38761:that the wretch who had planned the trap was a certain Jondrette; that
tests/les_miserables.txt:38762:there would be accomplices, probably some prowlers of the barriers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38763:among others a certain Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille;
tests/les_miserables.txt:38765:of warning the threatened man, since he did not even know his name; and
tests/les_miserables.txt:38766:that, finally, all this was to be carried out at six o’clock that
tests/les_miserables.txt:38770:At the sound of this number, the inspector raised his head, and said
tests/les_miserables.txt:38771:coldly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38773:“So it is in the room at the end of the corridor?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38776:“Precisely,” answered Marius, and he added: “Are you acquainted with
tests/les_miserables.txt:38780:The inspector remained silent for a moment, then replied, as he warmed
tests/les_miserables.txt:38787:much as his cravat:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38792:This word struck Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38794:“Patron-Minette,” said he, “I did hear that word pronounced, in fact.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38797:And he repeated to the inspector the dialogue between the long-haired
tests/les_miserables.txt:38801:The inspector muttered:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38807:He had dropped his eyelids again, and became absorbed in thought.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38809:“As for Father What’s-his-name, I think I recognize him. Here, I’ve
tests/les_miserables.txt:38810:burned my coat. They always have too much fire in these cursed stoves.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38814:Then he glanced at Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38819:“And Panchaud.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38835:“Nor a scamp with the air of an old red tail?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38841:“As for the fourth, no one sees him, not even his adjutants, clerks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38847:The inspector answered:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38852:He relapsed into silence, then resumed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38854:“50-52. I know that barrack. Impossible to conceal ourselves inside it
tests/les_miserables.txt:38856:countermanding the vaudeville. They are so modest! An audience
tests/les_miserables.txt:38858:and make them dance.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38861:This monologue concluded, he turned to Marius, and demanded, gazing at
tests/les_miserables.txt:38873:notice that this police agent had not yet said “monsieur” to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38875:The inspector stared still more intently at Marius, and continued with
tests/les_miserables.txt:38879:does not fear crime, and honesty does not fear authority.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38887:The inspector contented himself with the remark:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38889:“The lodgers have pass-keys with which to get in at night. You must
tests/les_miserables.txt:38901:“Give it to me,” said the inspector.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38903:Marius took his key from his waistcoat pocket, handed it to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38904:inspector and added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38906:“If you will take my advice, you will come in force.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38909:The inspector cast on Marius such a glance as Voltaire might have
tests/les_miserables.txt:38910:bestowed on a provincial academician who had suggested a rhyme to him;
tests/les_miserables.txt:38911:with one movement he plunged his hands, which were enormous, into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:38912:two immense pockets of his top-coat, and pulled out two small steel
tests/les_miserables.txt:38913:pistols, of the sort called “knock-me-downs.” Then he presented them to
tests/les_miserables.txt:38914:Marius, saying rapidly, in a curt tone:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38916:“Take these. Go home. Hide in your chamber, so that you may be supposed
tests/les_miserables.txt:38917:to have gone out. They are loaded. Each one carries two balls. You will
tests/les_miserables.txt:38918:keep watch; there is a hole in the wall, as you have informed me. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:38919:men will come. Leave them to their own devices for a time. When you
tests/les_miserables.txt:38920:think matters have reached a crisis, and that it is time to put a stop
tests/les_miserables.txt:38921:to them, fire a shot. Not too soon. The rest concerns me. A shot into
tests/les_miserables.txt:38922:the ceiling, the air, no matter where. Above all things, not too soon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38923:Wait until they begin to put their project into execution; you are a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38925:them in the side pocket of his coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38927:“That makes a lump that can be seen,” said the inspector. “Put them in
tests/les_miserables.txt:38928:your trousers pocket.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38931:Marius hid the pistols in his trousers pockets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38933:“Now,” pursued the inspector, “there is not a minute more to be lost by
tests/les_miserables.txt:38934:any one. What time is it? Half-past two. Seven o’clock is the hour?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38937:“Six o’clock,” answered Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38939:“I have plenty of time,” said the inspector, “but no more than enough.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38946:the inspector called to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38948:“By the way, if you have occasion for my services between now and then,
tests/les_miserables.txt:38949:come or send here. You will ask for Inspector Javert.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38958:A few moments later, about three o’clock, Courfeyrac chanced to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:38959:passing along the Rue Mouffetard in company with Bossuet. The snow had
tests/les_miserables.txt:38960:redoubled in violence, and filled the air. Bossuet was just saying to
tests/les_miserables.txt:38961:Courfeyrac:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:38964:plague of white butterflies in heaven.” All at once, Bossuet caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:38965:sight of Marius coming up the street towards the barrier with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38966:peculiar air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38971:“I saw him,” said Courfeyrac. “Don’t let’s speak to him.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38994:“Just see the eyes he is making!” said Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:38996:“But who the deuce is he following?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:38999:“Some fine, flowery bonneted wench! He’s in love.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39002:“But,” observed Bossuet, “I don’t see any wench nor any flowery bonnet
tests/les_miserables.txt:39006:Courfeyrac took a survey, and exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39011:A man, in fact, wearing a gray cap, and whose gray beard could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:39012:distinguished, although they only saw his back, was walking along about
tests/les_miserables.txt:39013:twenty paces in advance of Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39015:This man was dressed in a great-coat which was perfectly new and too
tests/les_miserables.txt:39017:and black with mud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39024:“He?” retorted Courfeyrac, “he’s a poet. Poets are very fond of wearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:39025:the trousers of dealers in rabbit skins and the overcoats of peers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39026:France.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39033:“Bossuet!” exclaimed Courfeyrac, “eagle of Meaux! You are a prodigious
tests/les_miserables.txt:39037:They retraced their steps.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39039:Marius had, in fact, seen Jondrette passing along the Rue Mouffetard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39040:and was spying on his proceedings.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39042:Jondrette walked straight ahead, without a suspicion that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:39043:already held by a glance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39046:terrible hovels in the Rue Gracieuse; he remained there about a quarter
tests/les_miserables.txt:39048:ironmonger’s shop, which then stood at the corner of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:39050:shop, holding in his hand a huge cold chisel with a white wood handle,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39051:which he concealed beneath his great-coat. At the top of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:39052:Petit-Gentilly he turned to the left and proceeded rapidly to the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:39053:du Petit-Banquier. The day was declining; the snow, which had ceased
tests/les_miserables.txt:39054:for a moment, had just begun again. Marius posted himself on the watch
tests/les_miserables.txt:39055:at the very corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier, which was deserted, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:39056:usual, and did not follow Jondrette into it. It was lucky that he did
tests/les_miserables.txt:39057:so, for, on arriving in the vicinity of the wall where Marius had heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:39058:the long-haired man and the bearded man conversing, Jondrette turned
tests/les_miserables.txt:39060:sprang across the wall and disappeared.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39062:The waste land bordered by this wall communicated with the back yard of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39066:Marius thought that it would be wise to profit by Jondrette’s absence
tests/les_miserables.txt:39069:locking the door, which was always closed at dusk. Marius had given his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39070:key to the inspector of police; it was important, therefore, that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:39073:Evening had arrived, night had almost closed in; on the horizon and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:39074:the immensity of space, there remained but one spot illuminated by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39081:the wall of the corridor to his chamber. This corridor, as the reader
tests/les_miserables.txt:39082:will remember, was bordered on both sides by attics, all of which were,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39084:leaving all the doors open. As he passed one of these attics, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:39085:thought he perceived in the uninhabited cell the motionless heads of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39090:succeeded in reaching his chamber without being seen and without making
tests/les_miserables.txt:39092:her departure, locking the door of the house behind her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39102:o’clock. Only half an hour separated him from what was about to happen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39103:He heard the beating of his arteries as one hears the ticking of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39104:watch in the dark. He thought of the double march which was going on at
tests/les_miserables.txt:39105:that moment in the dark,—crime advancing on one side, justice coming up
tests/les_miserables.txt:39106:on the other. He was not afraid, but he could not think without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39107:shudder of what was about to take place. As is the case with all those
tests/les_miserables.txt:39109:produced upon him the effect of a dream, and in order to persuade
tests/les_miserables.txt:39111:cold barrels of the steel pistols in his trousers pockets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39114:clearly from the mist, and its light, mingled with the white reflection
tests/les_miserables.txt:39115:of the snow which had fallen, communicated to the chamber a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39116:twilight aspect.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39119:shining with a reddish glow which seemed bloody to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39121:It was true that the light could not be produced by a candle. However,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39123:there, not a soul speaking, not a breath; the silence was glacial and
tests/les_miserables.txt:39125:himself next door to a sepulchre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39130:hinges; a heavy step mounted the staircase, and hastened along the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39131:corridor; the latch of the hovel was noisily lifted; it was Jondrette
tests/les_miserables.txt:39134:Instantly, several voices arose. The whole family was in the garret.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39135:Only, it had been silent in the master’s absence, like wolf whelps in
tests/les_miserables.txt:39136:the absence of the wolf.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39145:cold. Good! You have dressed up. You have done well! You must inspire
tests/les_miserables.txt:39146:confidence.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39158:“Because—” said Jondrette. And he left the phrase unfinished.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39160:Marius heard him lay something heavy on the table, probably the chisel
tests/les_miserables.txt:39161:which he had purchased.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39167:took advantage of the fire to cook them.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39171:me. We will have a duck and fixings. You shall dine like Charles the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39177:“The mouse-trap is open. The cats are there.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39180:He lowered his voice still further, and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39185:Marius heard a sound of charcoal being knocked with the tongs or some
tests/les_miserables.txt:39186:iron utensil, and Jondrette continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39196:“Nearly six. The half-hour struck from Saint-Médard a while ago.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39199:“The devil!” ejaculated Jondrette; “the children must go and watch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39205:Jondrette’s voice became audible again:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39226:whether he is there. Here, my girl, take the candle and go there.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39229:Marius fell on his hands and knees and crawled silently under his bed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39231:Hardly had he concealed himself, when he perceived a light through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39232:crack of his door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39234:“P’pa,” cried a voice, “he is not in here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39237:He recognized the voice of the eldest daughter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39245:The father exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39250:The door opened, and Marius saw the tall Jondrette come in with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39251:candle in her hand. She was as she had been in the morning, only still
tests/les_miserables.txt:39254:She walked straight up to the bed. Marius endured an indescribable
tests/les_miserables.txt:39256:wall, and it was thither that she was directing her steps. She raised
tests/les_miserables.txt:39258:the sound of iron articles being moved was audible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39261:mirror, humming with her cracked and sepulchral voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39264:Mais que du bonheur les instants sont courts!
tests/les_miserables.txt:39265:S’adorer huit jours, c’était bien la peine!
tests/les_miserables.txt:39276:“How ugly Paris is when it has put on a white chemise!” said she.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39279:scrutinizing herself full-face and three-quarters face in turn.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39281:“Well!” cried her father, “what are you about there?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39284:“I am looking under the bed and the furniture,” she replied, continuing
tests/les_miserables.txt:39299:Mon triste cœur suivra partout.29
tests/les_miserables.txt:39302:She cast a parting glance in the mirror and went out, shutting the door
tests/les_miserables.txt:39306:feet in the corridor, and Jondrette’s voice shouting to them:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39308:“Pay strict heed! One on the side of the barrier, the other at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39309:corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier. Don’t lose sight for a moment of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39311:the instant! as hard as you can go! You have a key to get in.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39316:“The idea of standing watch in the snow barefoot!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39322:They ran downstairs, and a few seconds later the shock of the outer
tests/les_miserables.txt:39323:door as it banged to announced that they were outside.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39326:probably, also, the mysterious persons of whom Marius had caught a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39327:glimpse in the twilight, behind the door of the unused attic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39335:Marius decided that the moment had now arrived when he must resume his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39337:age, he had reached the hole in the partition.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39341:The interior of the Jondrette apartment presented a curious aspect, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:39342:Marius found an explanation of the singular light which he had noticed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39343:A candle was burning in a candlestick covered with verdigris, but that
tests/les_miserables.txt:39344:was not what really lighted the chamber. The hovel was completely
tests/les_miserables.txt:39345:illuminated, as it were, by the reflection from a rather large
tests/les_miserables.txt:39346:sheet-iron brazier standing in the fireplace, and filled with burning
tests/les_miserables.txt:39347:charcoal, the brazier prepared by the Jondrette woman that morning. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:39348:charcoal was glowing hot and the brazier was red; a blue flame
tests/les_miserables.txt:39349:flickered over it, and helped him to make out the form of the chisel
tests/les_miserables.txt:39350:purchased by Jondrette in the Rue Pierre-Lombard, where it had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:39351:thrust into the brazier to heat. In one corner, near the door, and as
tests/les_miserables.txt:39352:though prepared for some definite use, two heaps were visible, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:39354:All this would have caused the mind of a person who knew nothing of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39360:The heat of the brazier was so great, that the candle on the table was
tests/les_miserables.txt:39361:melting on the side next the chafing-dish, and was drooping over. An
tests/les_miserables.txt:39362:old dark-lantern of copper, worthy of Diogenes turned Cartouche, stood
tests/les_miserables.txt:39363:on the chimney-piece.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39365:The brazier, placed in the fireplace itself, beside the nearly extinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:39366:brands, sent its vapors up the chimney, and gave out no odor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39368:The moon, entering through the four panes of the window, cast its
tests/les_miserables.txt:39369:whiteness into the crimson and flaming garret; and to the poetic spirit
tests/les_miserables.txt:39370:of Marius, who was dreamy even in the moment of action, it was like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39373:A breath of air which made its way in through the open pane, helped to
tests/les_miserables.txt:39374:dissipate the smell of the charcoal and to conceal the presence of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39377:The Jondrette lair was, if the reader recalls what we have said of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39378:Gorbeau building, admirably chosen to serve as the theatre of a violent
tests/les_miserables.txt:39379:and sombre deed, and as the envelope for a crime. It was the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:39380:retired chamber in the most isolated house on the most deserted
tests/les_miserables.txt:39384:The whole thickness of a house and a multitude of uninhabited rooms
tests/les_miserables.txt:39386:opened on waste lands enclosed with walls and palisades.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39388:Jondrette had lighted his pipe, seated himself on the seatless chair,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39391:If Marius had been Courfeyrac, that is to say, one of those men who
tests/les_miserables.txt:39392:laugh on every occasion in life, he would have burst with laughter when
tests/les_miserables.txt:39393:his gaze fell on the Jondrette woman. She had on a black bonnet with
tests/les_miserables.txt:39394:plumes not unlike the hats of the heralds-at-arms at the coronation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39395:Charles X., an immense tartan shawl over her knitted petticoat, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39396:man’s shoes which her daughter had scorned in the morning. It was this
tests/les_miserables.txt:39397:toilette which had extracted from Jondrette the exclamation: “Good! You
tests/les_miserables.txt:39398:have dressed up. You have done well. You must inspire confidence!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39401:As for Jondrette, he had not taken off the new surtout, which was too
tests/les_miserables.txt:39402:large for him, and which M. Leblanc had given him, and his costume
tests/les_miserables.txt:39403:continued to present that contrast of coat and trousers which
tests/les_miserables.txt:39404:constituted the ideal of a poet in Courfeyrac’s eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39406:All at once, Jondrette lifted up his voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39408:“By the way! Now that I think of it. In this weather, he will come in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39409:carriage. Light the lantern, take it and go downstairs. You will stand
tests/les_miserables.txt:39410:behind the lower door. The very moment that you hear the carriage stop,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39411:you will open the door, instantly, he will come up, you will light the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39412:staircase and the corridor, and when he enters here, you will go
tests/les_miserables.txt:39413:downstairs again as speedily as possible, you will pay the coachman,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39414:and dismiss the fiacre.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39419:Jondrette fumbled in his trousers pocket and handed her five francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39421:“What’s this?” she exclaimed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39425:“That is the monarch which our neighbor gave us this morning.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39430:“Do you know what? Two chairs will be needed here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39439:Marius felt a cold chill pass through his limbs at hearing this mild
tests/les_miserables.txt:39446:into the corridor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39448:Marius absolutely had not the time to descend from the commode, reach
tests/les_miserables.txt:39449:his bed, and conceal himself beneath it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39451:“Take the candle,” cried Jondrette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39453:“No,” said she, “it would embarrass me, I have the two chairs to carry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39457:Marius heard Mother Jondrette’s heavy hand fumbling at his lock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39458:dark. The door opened. He remained nailed to the spot with the shock
tests/les_miserables.txt:39463:The dormer window permitted the entrance of a ray of moonlight between
tests/les_miserables.txt:39464:two blocks of shadow. One of these blocks of shadow entirely covered
tests/les_miserables.txt:39465:the wall against which Marius was leaning, so that he disappeared
tests/les_miserables.txt:39469:chairs, the only ones which Marius possessed, and went away, letting
tests/les_miserables.txt:39474:“Here are the two chairs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39477:“And here is the lantern. Go down as quick as you can.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39482:He placed the two chairs on opposite sides of the table, turned the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39483:chisel in the brazier, set in front of the fireplace an old screen
tests/les_miserables.txt:39484:which masked the chafing-dish, then went to the corner where lay the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39486:recognized the fact, that what he had taken for a shapeless mass was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39487:very well-made rope-ladder, with wooden rungs and two hooks with which
tests/les_miserables.txt:39488:to attach it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39490:This ladder, and some large tools, veritable masses of iron, which were
tests/les_miserables.txt:39493:in the afternoon, during Marius’ absence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39498:recognized in what he took for the engines of an edge-tool maker,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39499:certain instruments which will force a lock or pick a lock, and others
tests/les_miserables.txt:39500:which will cut or slice, the two families of tools which burglars call
tests/les_miserables.txt:39501:_cadets_ and _fauchants_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39503:The fireplace and the two chairs were exactly opposite Marius. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:39504:brazier being concealed, the only light in the room was now furnished
tests/les_miserables.txt:39505:by the candle; the smallest bit of crockery on the table or on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39506:chimney-piece cast a large shadow. There was something indescribably
tests/les_miserables.txt:39507:calm, threatening, and hideous about this chamber. One felt that there
tests/les_miserables.txt:39508:existed in it the anticipation of something terrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39511:preoccupation, and had again seated himself. The candle brought out the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39512:fierce and the fine angles of his countenance. He indulged in scowls
tests/les_miserables.txt:39514:responding to the last counsels of a sombre inward monologue. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39515:course of one of these dark replies which he was making to himself, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:39516:pulled the table drawer rapidly towards him, took out a long kitchen
tests/les_miserables.txt:39517:knife which was concealed there, and tried the edge of its blade on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39518:nail. That done, he put the knife back in the drawer and shut it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39520:Marius, on his side, grasped the pistol in his right pocket, drew it
tests/les_miserables.txt:39521:out and cocked it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39523:The pistol emitted a sharp, clear click, as he cocked it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39528:“What a fool I am! It’s the partition cracking!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39539:Suddenly, the distant and melancholy vibration of a clock shook the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39540:panes. Six o’clock was striking from Saint-Médard.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39542:Jondrette marked off each stroke with a toss of his head. When the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39543:sixth had struck, he snuffed the candle with his fingers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39545:Then he began to pace up and down the room, listened at the corridor,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39546:walked on again, then listened once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39548:“Provided only that he comes!” he muttered, then he returned to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39549:chair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39553:Mother Jondrette had opened it, and now remained in the corridor making
tests/les_miserables.txt:39554:a horrible, amiable grimace, which one of the holes of the dark-lantern
tests/les_miserables.txt:39559:“Enter, my benefactor,” repeated Jondrette, rising hastily.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39561:M. Leblanc made his appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39563:He wore an air of serenity which rendered him singularly venerable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39568:pressing necessities. We will attend to the rest hereafter.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39571:“May God requite it to you, my generous benefactor!” said Jondrette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39573:And rapidly approaching his wife:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39575:“Dismiss the carriage!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39579:Leblanc a chair. An instant later she returned and whispered in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39585:The snow, which had not ceased falling since the morning, was so deep
tests/les_miserables.txt:39586:that the arrival of the fiacre had not been audible, and they did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:39589:Meanwhile, M. Leblanc had seated himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39591:Jondrette had taken possession of the other chair, facing M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39593:Now, in order to form an idea of the scene which is to follow, let the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39594:reader picture to himself in his own mind, a cold night, the solitudes
tests/les_miserables.txt:39595:of the Salpêtrière covered with snow and white as winding-sheets in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39596:moonlight, the taper-like lights of the street lanterns which shone
tests/les_miserables.txt:39597:redly here and there along those tragic boulevards, and the long rows
tests/les_miserables.txt:39598:of black elms, not a passer-by for perhaps a quarter of a league
tests/les_miserables.txt:39599:around, the Gorbeau hovel, at its highest pitch of silence, of horror,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39602:single candle, and in that den two men seated at a table, M. Leblanc
tests/les_miserables.txt:39604:female wolf, in one corner, and, behind the partition, Marius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39605:invisible, erect, not losing a word, not missing a single movement, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39606:eye on the watch, and pistol in hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39608:However, Marius experienced only an emotion of horror, but no fear. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:39609:clasped the stock of the pistol firmly and felt reassured. “I shall be
tests/les_miserables.txt:39610:able to stop that wretch whenever I please,” he thought.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39612:He felt that the police were there somewhere in ambuscade, waiting for
tests/les_miserables.txt:39613:the signal agreed upon and ready to stretch out their arm.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39615:Moreover, he was in hopes, that this violent encounter between
tests/les_miserables.txt:39616:Jondrette and M. Leblanc would cast some light on all the things which
tests/les_miserables.txt:39625:Hardly was M. Leblanc seated, when he turned his eyes towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39626:pallets, which were empty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39632:have her hurt dressed. You will see them presently; they will be back
tests/les_miserables.txt:39636:“Madame Fabantou seems to me to be better,” went on M. Leblanc, casting
tests/les_miserables.txt:39637:his eyes on the eccentric costume of the Jondrette woman, as she stood
tests/les_miserables.txt:39639:gazed at him in an attitude of menace and almost of combat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39641:“She is dying,” said Jondrette. “But what do you expect, sir! She has
tests/les_miserables.txt:39642:so much courage, that woman has! She’s not a woman, she’s an ox.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39645:The Jondrette, touched by his compliment, deprecated it with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39646:affected airs of a flattered monster.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39651:“Jondrette!” said M. Leblanc, “I thought your name was Fabantou?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39655:artistic sobriquet!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39658:And launching at his wife a shrug of the shoulders which M. Leblanc did
tests/les_miserables.txt:39659:not catch, he continued with an emphatic and caressing inflection of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39660:voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39663:would there be left for us if we had not that? We are so wretched, my
tests/les_miserables.txt:39664:respectable sir! We have arms, but there is no work! We have the will,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39666:of honor, sir, I am not Jacobin, sir, I am not a bousingot.30 I don’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:39667:wish them any evil, but if I were the ministers, on my most sacred
tests/les_miserables.txt:39668:word, things would be different. Here, for instance, I wanted to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:39671:fall, my benefactor! What a degradation, when one has been what we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:39673:thing only, a picture, of which I think a great deal, but which I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:39677:While Jondrette thus talked, with an apparent incoherence which
tests/les_miserables.txt:39678:detracted nothing from the thoughtful and sagacious expression of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39679:physiognomy, Marius raised his eyes, and perceived at the other end of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39682:man wore a violet knitted vest, which was old, worn, spotted, cut and
tests/les_miserables.txt:39683:gaping at every fold, wide trousers of cotton velvet, wooden shoes on
tests/les_miserables.txt:39684:his feet, no shirt, had his neck bare, his bare arms tattooed, and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39685:face smeared with black. He had seated himself in silence on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39686:nearest bed, and, as he was behind Jondrette, he could only be
tests/les_miserables.txt:39687:indistinctly seen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39689:That sort of magnetic instinct which turns aside the gaze, caused M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39690:Leblanc to turn round almost at the same moment as Marius. He could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:39691:refrain from a gesture of surprise which did not escape Jondrette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39693:“Ah! I see!” exclaimed Jondrette, buttoning up his coat with an air of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39694:complaisance, “you are looking at your overcoat? It fits me! My faith,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39698:“Who is that man?” said M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39700:“Him?” ejaculated Jondrette, “he’s a neighbor of mine. Don’t pay any
tests/les_miserables.txt:39704:The neighbor was a singular-looking individual. However, manufactories
tests/les_miserables.txt:39705:of chemical products abound in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau. Many of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39706:workmen might have black faces. Besides this, M. Leblanc’s whole person
tests/les_miserables.txt:39707:was expressive of candid and intrepid confidence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39711:“Excuse me; what were you saying, M. Fabantou?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39714:“I was telling you, sir, and dear protector,” replied Jondrette placing
tests/les_miserables.txt:39715:his elbows on the table and contemplating M. Leblanc with steady and
tests/les_miserables.txt:39716:tender eyes, not unlike the eyes of the boa-constrictor, “I was telling
tests/les_miserables.txt:39717:you, that I have a picture to sell.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39720:A slight sound came from the door. A second man had just entered and
tests/les_miserables.txt:39724:lampblack.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39727:able to prevent M. Leblanc catching sight of him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39731:picture. But stop, sir, take a look at it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39734:He rose, went to the wall at the foot of which stood the panel which we
tests/les_miserables.txt:39736:against the wall. It really was something which resembled a picture,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39737:and which the candle illuminated, somewhat. Marius could make nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:39738:out of it, as Jondrette stood between the picture and him; he only saw
tests/les_miserables.txt:39739:a coarse daub, and a sort of principal personage colored with the harsh
tests/les_miserables.txt:39740:crudity of foreign canvasses and screen paintings.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39742:“What is that?” asked M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39744:Jondrette exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39746:“A painting by a master, a picture of great value, my benefactor! I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:39747:as much attached to it as I am to my two daughters; it recalls
tests/les_miserables.txt:39748:souvenirs to me! But I have told you, and I will not take it back, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:39749:I am so wretched that I will part with it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39752:Either by chance, or because he had begun to feel a dawning uneasiness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39753:M. Leblanc’s glance returned to the bottom of the room as he examined
tests/les_miserables.txt:39754:the picture.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39757:door-post, all four with bare arms and motionless, with faces smeared
tests/les_miserables.txt:39758:with black. One of those on the bed was leaning against the wall, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:39759:closed eyes, and it might have been supposed that he was asleep. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:39760:old; his white hair contrasting with his blackened face produced a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39761:horrible effect. The other two seemed to be young; one wore a beard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39763:not wear socks were barefooted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39765:Jondrette noticed that M. Leblanc’s eye was fixed on these men.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39767:“They are friends. They are neighbors,” said he. “Their faces are black
tests/les_miserables.txt:39768:because they work in charcoal. They are chimney-builders. Don’t trouble
tests/les_miserables.txt:39769:yourself about them, my benefactor, but buy my picture. Have pity on my
tests/les_miserables.txt:39770:misery. I will not ask you much for it. How much do you think it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:39774:“Well,” said M. Leblanc, looking Jondrette full in the eye, and with
tests/les_miserables.txt:39776:tavern, and is worth about three francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39781:“Have you your pocket-book with you? I should be satisfied with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39782:thousand crowns.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39785:M. Leblanc sprang up, placed his back against the wall, and cast a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39786:rapid glance around the room. He had Jondrette on his left, on the side
tests/les_miserables.txt:39792:an eye, and so lamentable an intonation, that M. Leblanc might have
tests/les_miserables.txt:39796:“If you do not buy my picture, my dear benefactor,” said Jondrette, “I
tests/les_miserables.txt:39797:shall be left without resources; there will be nothing left for me but
tests/les_miserables.txt:39799:two girls taught the middle-class paper-box trade, the making of boxes
tests/les_miserables.txt:39801:glasses from falling off is required, then a special stove is needed, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39802:pot with three compartments for the different degrees of strength of
tests/les_miserables.txt:39803:the paste, according as it is to be used for wood, paper, or stuff, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39804:paring-knife to cut the cardboard, a mould to adjust it, a hammer to
tests/les_miserables.txt:39805:nail the steels, pincers, how the devil do I know what all? And all
tests/les_miserables.txt:39807:hours a day! And each box passes through the workwoman’s hands thirteen
tests/les_miserables.txt:39808:times! And you can’t wet the paper! And you mustn’t spot anything! And
tests/les_miserables.txt:39813:As he spoke, Jondrette did not look at M. Leblanc, who was observing
tests/les_miserables.txt:39814:him. M. Leblanc’s eye was fixed on Jondrette, and Jondrette’s eye was
tests/les_miserables.txt:39816:the other. M. Leblanc seemed to be asking himself: “Is this man an
tests/les_miserables.txt:39817:idiot?” Jondrette repeated two or three distinct times, with all manner
tests/les_miserables.txt:39818:of varying inflections of the whining and supplicating order: “There is
tests/les_miserables.txt:39824:All at once his dull eyes lighted up with a hideous flash; the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:39825:man drew himself up and became terrible, took a step toward M. Leblanc
tests/les_miserables.txt:39826:and cried in a voice of thunder: “That has nothing to do with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39837:three men clad in blue linen blouses, and masked with masks of black
tests/les_miserables.txt:39838:paper. The first was thin, and had a long, iron-tipped cudgel; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39839:second, who was a sort of colossus, carried, by the middle of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39840:handle, with the blade downward, a butcher’s pole-axe for slaughtering
tests/les_miserables.txt:39841:cattle. The third, a man with thick-set shoulders, not so slender as
tests/les_miserables.txt:39847:cudgel, the thin one.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39856:“The young principal actor stopped to chat with your girl.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39859:“Which?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39865:“Is there a carriage at the door?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39880:“Excellent.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39891:M. Leblanc was very pale. He was scrutinizing everything around him in
tests/les_miserables.txt:39893:head, directed in turn toward all the heads which surrounded him, moved
tests/les_miserables.txt:39894:on his neck with an astonished and attentive slowness, but there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:39895:nothing in his air which resembled fear. He had improvised an
tests/les_miserables.txt:39896:intrenchment out of the table; and the man, who but an instant
tests/les_miserables.txt:39897:previously, had borne merely the appearance of a kindly old man, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:39898:suddenly become a sort of athlete, and placed his robust fist on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39899:back of his chair, with a formidable and surprising gesture.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39901:This old man, who was so firm and so brave in the presence of such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39902:danger, seemed to possess one of those natures which are as courageous
tests/les_miserables.txt:39907:chimney-builders,” had armed themselves from the pile of old iron, one
tests/les_miserables.txt:39908:with a heavy pair of shears, the second with weighing-tongs, the third
tests/les_miserables.txt:39909:with a hammer, and had placed themselves across the entrance without
tests/les_miserables.txt:39914:Marius decided that in a few seconds more the moment for intervention
tests/les_miserables.txt:39915:would arrive, and he raised his right hand towards the ceiling, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39916:direction of the corridor, in readiness to discharge his pistol.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39918:Jondrette having terminated his colloquy with the man with the cudgel,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39919:turned once more to M. Leblanc, and repeated his question, accompanying
tests/les_miserables.txt:39920:it with that low, repressed, and terrible laugh which was peculiar to
tests/les_miserables.txt:39923:“So you do not recognize me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:39926:M. Leblanc looked him full in the face, and replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39931:Then Jondrette advanced to the table. He leaned across the candle,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39932:crossing his arms, putting his angular and ferocious jaw close to M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:39933:Leblanc’s calm face, and advancing as far as possible without forcing
tests/les_miserables.txt:39934:M. Leblanc to retreat, and, in this posture of a wild beast who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:39935:about to bite, he exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39942:An almost imperceptible flush crossed M. Leblanc’s brow, and he replied
tests/les_miserables.txt:39943:with a voice which neither trembled nor rose above its ordinary level,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39944:with his accustomed placidity:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:39950:through the darkness would have perceived that he was haggard, stupid,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39951:thunder-struck. At the moment when Jondrette said: “My name is
tests/les_miserables.txt:39953:the wall, as though he felt the cold of a steel blade through his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39954:heart. Then his right arm, all ready to discharge the signal shot,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39956:do you understand?” Marius’s faltering fingers had come near letting
tests/les_miserables.txt:39958:Leblanc, but he had quite upset Marius. That name of Thénardier, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:39959:which M. Leblanc did not seem to be acquainted, Marius knew well. Let
tests/les_miserables.txt:39960:the reader recall what that name meant to him! That name he had worn on
tests/les_miserables.txt:39961:his heart, inscribed in his father’s testament! He bore it at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39962:bottom of his mind, in the depths of his memory, in that sacred
tests/les_miserables.txt:39963:injunction: “A certain Thénardier saved my life. If my son encounters
tests/les_miserables.txt:39969:was a ruffian! That man, to whose service Marius was burning to devote
tests/les_miserables.txt:39970:himself, was a monster! That liberator of Colonel Pontmercy was on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39971:point of committing a crime whose scope Marius did not, as yet, clearly
tests/les_miserables.txt:39972:comprehend, but which resembled an assassination! And against whom,
tests/les_miserables.txt:39973:great God! what a fatality! What a bitter mockery of fate! His father
tests/les_miserables.txt:39974:had commanded him from the depths of his coffin to do all the good in
tests/les_miserables.txt:39975:his power to this Thénardier, and for four years Marius had cherished
tests/les_miserables.txt:39976:no other thought than to acquit this debt of his father’s, and at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39978:act of crime by justice, destiny cried to him: “This is Thénardier!” He
tests/les_miserables.txt:39979:could at last repay this man for his father’s life, saved amid a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39980:hail-storm of grape-shot on the heroic field of Waterloo, and repay it
tests/les_miserables.txt:39981:with the scaffold! He had sworn to himself that if ever he found that
tests/les_miserables.txt:39983:and now he actually had found him, but it was only to deliver him over
tests/les_miserables.txt:39984:to the executioner! His father said to him: “Succor Thénardier!” And he
tests/les_miserables.txt:39985:replied to that adored and sainted voice by crushing Thénardier! He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:39986:about to offer to his father in his grave the spectacle of that man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:39987:had torn him from death at the peril of his own life, executed on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39988:Place Saint-Jacques through the means of his son, of that Marius to
tests/les_miserables.txt:39989:whom he had entrusted that man by his will! And what a mockery to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:39990:so long worn on his breast his father’s last commands, written in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:39991:own hand, only to act in so horribly contrary a sense! But, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:39993:victim and to spare the assassin! Could one be held to any gratitude
tests/les_miserables.txt:39994:towards so miserable a wretch? All the ideas which Marius had cherished
tests/les_miserables.txt:39995:for the last four years were pierced through and through, as it were,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40000:his eyes. If he fired his pistol, M. Leblanc was saved, and Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:40001:lost; if he did not fire, M. Leblanc would be sacrificed, and, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:40002:knows? Thénardier would escape. Should he dash down the one or allow
tests/les_miserables.txt:40003:the other to fall? Remorse awaited him in either case.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40005:What was he to do? What should he choose? Be false to the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:40007:sacred duty, to the most venerated text! Should he ignore his father’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:40008:testament, or allow the perpetration of a crime! On the one hand, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:40009:seemed to him that he heard “his Ursule” supplicating for her father
tests/les_miserables.txt:40010:and on the other, the colonel commending Thénardier to his care. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:40012:not even the time for deliberation, so great was the fury with which
tests/les_miserables.txt:40013:the scene before his eyes was hastening to its catastrophe. It was like
tests/les_miserables.txt:40014:a whirlwind of which he had thought himself the master, and which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:40017:In the meantime, Thénardier, whom we shall henceforth call by no other
tests/les_miserables.txt:40018:name, was pacing up and down in front of the table in a sort of frenzy
tests/les_miserables.txt:40021:He seized the candle in his fist, and set it on the chimney-piece with
tests/les_miserables.txt:40022:so violent a bang that the wick came near being extinguished, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40025:Then he turned to M. Leblanc with a horrible look, and spit out these
tests/les_miserables.txt:40028:“Done for! Smoked brown! Cooked! Spitchcocked!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40031:And again he began to march back and forth, in full eruption.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40033:“Ah!” he cried, “so I’ve found you again at last, Mister
tests/les_miserables.txt:40035:you old ninny! Ah! so you don’t recognize me! No, it wasn’t you who
tests/les_miserables.txt:40036:came to Montfermeil, to my inn, eight years ago, on Christmas eve,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40037:1823! It wasn’t you who carried off that Fantine’s child from me! The
tests/les_miserables.txt:40038:Lark! It wasn’t you who had a yellow great-coat! No! Nor a package of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40040:be his mania to carry packets of woollen stockings into houses! Old
tests/les_miserables.txt:40041:charity monger, get out with you! Are you a hosier, Mister
tests/les_miserables.txt:40042:millionnaire? You give away your stock in trade to the poor, holy man!
tests/les_miserables.txt:40043:What bosh! merry Andrew! Ah! and you don’t recognize me? Well, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:40044:recognize you, that I do! I recognized you the very moment you poked
tests/les_miserables.txt:40047:the pretext that they are taverns, in wretched clothes, with the air of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40048:a poor man, to whom one would give a sou, to deceive persons, to play
tests/les_miserables.txt:40050:threats in the woods, and you can’t call things quits because
tests/les_miserables.txt:40051:afterwards, when people are ruined, you bring a coat that is too large,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40052:and two miserable hospital blankets, you old blackguard, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:40053:child-stealer!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40058:then, as though he were concluding aloud the things which he had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:40065:And, apostrophizing M. Leblanc:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40067:“Parbleu! You made game of me in the past! You are the cause of all my
tests/les_miserables.txt:40068:misfortunes! For fifteen hundred francs you got a girl whom I had, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40069:who certainly belonged to rich people, and who had already brought in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40070:great deal of money, and from whom I might have extracted enough to
tests/les_miserables.txt:40072:that I lost in that vile cook-shop, where there was nothing but one
tests/les_miserables.txt:40073:continual row, and where, like a fool, I ate up my last farthing! Oh! I
tests/les_miserables.txt:40076:ridiculous when you went off with the Lark! You had your cudgel in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40078:to-day! You’re in a sorry case, my good fellow! Oh, but I can laugh!
tests/les_miserables.txt:40080:actor, that my name was Fabantou, that I had played comedy with
tests/les_miserables.txt:40081:Mamselle Mars, with Mamselle Muche, that my landlord insisted on being
tests/les_miserables.txt:40082:paid tomorrow, the 4th of February, and he didn’t even notice that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40084:quarter runs out! Absurd idiot! And the four miserable Philippes which
tests/les_miserables.txt:40085:he has brought me! Scoundrel! He hadn’t the heart even to go as high as
tests/les_miserables.txt:40086:a hundred francs! And how he swallowed my platitudes! That did amuse
tests/les_miserables.txt:40087:me. I said to myself: ‘Blockhead! Come, I’ve got you! I lick your paws
tests/les_miserables.txt:40091:Thénardier paused. He was out of breath. His little, narrow chest
tests/les_miserables.txt:40093:happiness of a feeble, cruel, and cowardly creature, which finds that
tests/les_miserables.txt:40094:it can, at last, harass what it has feared, and insult what it has
tests/les_miserables.txt:40096:head of Goliath, the joy of a jackal which is beginning to rend a sick
tests/les_miserables.txt:40097:bull, so nearly dead that he can no longer defend himself, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:40098:sufficiently alive to suffer still.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40100:M. Leblanc did not interrupt him, but said to him when he paused:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40107:“Ah!” roared Thénardier hoarsely, “a pretty lie! You stick to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:40108:pleasantry, do you! You’re floundering, my old buck! Ah! You don’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:40112:“Excuse me, sir,” said M. Leblanc with a politeness of accent, which at
tests/les_miserables.txt:40113:that moment seemed peculiarly strange and powerful, “I see that you are
tests/les_miserables.txt:40117:Who has not remarked the fact that odious creatures possess a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40118:susceptibility of their own, that monsters are ticklish! At this word
tests/les_miserables.txt:40120:grasped his chair as though he were about to crush it in his hands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40121:“Don’t you stir!” he shouted to his wife; and, turning to M. Leblanc:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40123:“Villain! Yes, I know that you call us that, you rich gentlemen! Stop!
tests/les_miserables.txt:40124:it’s true that I became bankrupt, that I am in hiding, that I have no
tests/les_miserables.txt:40126:days since I have had anything to eat, so I’m a villain! Ah! you folks
tests/les_miserables.txt:40127:warm your feet, you have Sakoski boots, you have wadded great-coats,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40128:like archbishops, you lodge on the first floor in houses that have
tests/les_miserables.txt:40129:porters, you eat truffles, you eat asparagus at forty francs the bunch
tests/les_miserables.txt:40131:you want to know whether it is cold, you look in the papers to see what
tests/les_miserables.txt:40134:corner of the Tour de l’Horologe, to find out the number of degrees of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40135:cold; we feel our blood congealing in our veins, and the ice forming
tests/les_miserables.txt:40136:round our hearts, and we say: ‘There is no God!’ And you come to our
tests/les_miserables.txt:40137:caverns, yes our caverns, for the purpose of calling us villains! But
tests/les_miserables.txt:40140:license, I have been an elector, I am a bourgeois, that I am! And it’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:40147:“When I think that he has dared to come here and talk to me like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40148:cobbler!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40151:Then addressing M. Leblanc with a fresh outburst of frenzy:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40153:“And listen to this also, Mister philanthropist! I’m not a suspicious
tests/les_miserables.txt:40154:character, not a bit of it! I’m not a man whose name nobody knows, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40155:who comes and abducts children from houses! I’m an old French soldier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40156:I ought to have been decorated! I was at Waterloo, so I was! And in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40157:battle I saved a general called the Comte of I don’t know what. He told
tests/les_miserables.txt:40158:me his name, but his beastly voice was so weak that I didn’t hear. All
tests/les_miserables.txt:40159:I caught was Merci [thanks]. I’d rather have had his name than his
tests/les_miserables.txt:40160:thanks. That would have helped me to find him again. The picture that
tests/les_miserables.txt:40161:you see here, and which was painted by David at Bruqueselles,—do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:40163:that feat of prowess. I have that general on my back, and I am carrying
tests/les_miserables.txt:40167:certificate of the fact in my pocket! I am a soldier of Waterloo, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:40174:Marius had regained some measure of control over his anguish, and was
tests/les_miserables.txt:40176:certainly was the Thénardier of the will. Marius shuddered at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:40177:reproach of ingratitude directed against his father, and which he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:40180:Moreover, there was in all these words of Thénardier, in his accent, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:40181:his gesture, in his glance which darted flames at every word, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:40182:was, in this explosion of an evil nature disclosing everything, in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:40183:mixture of braggadocio and abjectness, of pride and pettiness, of rage
tests/les_miserables.txt:40184:and folly, in that chaos of real griefs and false sentiments, in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:40185:immodesty of a malicious man tasting the voluptuous delights of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40186:violence, in that shameless nudity of a repulsive soul, in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:40187:conflagration of all sufferings combined with all hatreds, something
tests/les_miserables.txt:40188:which was as hideous as evil, and as heart-rending as the truth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40190:The picture of the master, the painting by David which he had proposed
tests/les_miserables.txt:40191:that M. Leblanc should purchase, was nothing else, as the reader has
tests/les_miserables.txt:40193:by himself, the only relic which he had preserved from his shipwreck at
tests/les_miserables.txt:40196:As he had ceased to intercept Marius’ visual ray, Marius could examine
tests/les_miserables.txt:40197:this thing, and in the daub, he actually did recognize a battle, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40198:background of smoke, and a man carrying another man. It was the group
tests/les_miserables.txt:40199:composed of Pontmercy and Thénardier; the sergeant the rescuer, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40200:colonel rescued. Marius was like a drunken man; this picture restored
tests/les_miserables.txt:40202:wine-shop at Montfermeil, it was a resurrection; a tomb had yawned, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40204:he had the cannon of Waterloo in his ears, his bleeding father, vaguely
tests/les_miserables.txt:40205:depicted on that sinister panel terrified him, and it seemed to him
tests/les_miserables.txt:40206:that the misshapen spectre was gazing intently at him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40208:When Thénardier had recovered his breath, he turned his bloodshot eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:40209:on M. Leblanc, and said to him in a low, curt voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40211:“What have you to say before we put the handcuffs on you?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40214:M. Leblanc held his peace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40216:In the midst of this silence, a cracked voice launched this lugubrious
tests/les_miserables.txt:40217:sarcasm from the corridor:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40224:At the same moment, an enormous, bristling, and clayey face made its
tests/les_miserables.txt:40225:appearance at the door, with a hideous laugh which exhibited not teeth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40228:It was the face of the man with the butcher’s axe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40230:“Why have you taken off your mask?” cried Thénardier in a rage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40234:For the last few minutes M. Leblanc had appeared to be watching and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40236:his own rage, was stalking to and fro in the den with full confidence
tests/les_miserables.txt:40239:Thénardier counted for but one man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40241:During his address to the man with the pole-axe, he had turned his back
tests/les_miserables.txt:40242:to M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40244:M. Leblanc seized this moment, overturned the chair with his foot and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40246:before Thénardier had time to turn round, he had reached the window. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:40247:open it, to scale the frame, to bestride it, was the work of a second
tests/les_miserables.txt:40249:back energetically into the hovel. These were the three
tests/les_miserables.txt:40250:“chimney-builders,” who had flung themselves upon him. At the same time
tests/les_miserables.txt:40253:At the trampling which ensued, the other ruffians rushed up from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40254:corridor. The old man on the bed, who seemed under the influence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40255:wine, descended from the pallet and came reeling up, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40258:One of the “chimney-builders,” whose smirched face was lighted up by
tests/les_miserables.txt:40259:the candle, and in whom Marius recognized, in spite of his daubing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40260:Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille, lifted above M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40261:Leblanc’s head a sort of bludgeon made of two balls of lead, at the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:40264:Marius could not resist this sight. “My father,” he thought, “forgive
tests/les_miserables.txt:40270:The shot was on the point of being discharged when Thénardier’s voice
tests/les_miserables.txt:40276:This desperate attempt of the victim, far from exasperating Thénardier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40277:had calmed him. There existed in him two men, the ferocious man and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40278:adroit man. Up to that moment, in the excess of his triumph in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40279:presence of the prey which had been brought down, and which did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:40280:stir, the ferocious man had prevailed; when the victim struggled and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40283:“Don’t hurt him!” he repeated, and without suspecting it, his first
tests/les_miserables.txt:40284:success was to arrest the pistol in the act of being discharged, and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:40285:paralyze Marius, in whose opinion the urgency of the case disappeared,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40286:and who, in the face of this new phase, saw no inconvenience in waiting
tests/les_miserables.txt:40289:Who knows whether some chance would not arise which would deliver him
tests/les_miserables.txt:40291:of destroying the colonel’s saviour?
tests/les_miserables.txt:40293:A herculean struggle had begun. With one blow full in the chest, M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40294:Leblanc had sent the old man tumbling, rolling in the middle of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40295:room, then with two backward sweeps of his hand he had overthrown two
tests/les_miserables.txt:40296:more assailants, and he held one under each of his knees; the wretches
tests/les_miserables.txt:40299:arms and the back of his neck, and were holding him doubled up over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40300:two “chimney-builders” on the floor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40302:Thus, the master of some and mastered by the rest, crushing those
tests/les_miserables.txt:40304:to shake off all the efforts which were heaped upon him, M. Leblanc
tests/les_miserables.txt:40308:They succeeded in overthrowing him upon the bed nearest the window, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40310:clutch on his hair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40319:“Now,” said Thénardier, “search him, you other fellows!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40322:M. Leblanc seemed to have renounced the idea of resistance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40324:They searched him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40326:He had nothing on his person except a leather purse containing six
tests/les_miserables.txt:40327:francs, and his handkerchief.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40329:Thénardier put the handkerchief into his own pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40331:“What! No pocket-book?” he demanded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40333:“No, nor watch,” replied one of the “chimney-builders.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40336:“Never mind,” murmured the masked man who carried the big key, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40337:voice of a ventriloquist, “he’s a tough old fellow.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40340:Thénardier went to the corner near the door, picked up a bundle of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40345:And, catching sight of the old man who had been stretched across the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40346:room by the blow from M. Leblanc’s fist, and who made no movement, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:40355:“Sweep him into a corner,” said Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40357:Two of the “chimney-builders” pushed the drunken man into the corner
tests/les_miserables.txt:40360:“Babet,” said Thénardier in a low tone to the man with the cudgel, “why
tests/les_miserables.txt:40364:“What can you do?” replied the man with the cudgel, “they all wanted to
tests/les_miserables.txt:40368:The pallet on which M. Leblanc had been thrown was a sort of hospital
tests/les_miserables.txt:40369:bed, elevated on four coarse wooden legs, roughly hewn.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40371:M. Leblanc let them take their own course.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40373:The ruffians bound him securely, in an upright attitude, with his feet
tests/les_miserables.txt:40374:on the ground at the head of the bed, the end which was most remote
tests/les_miserables.txt:40375:from the window, and nearest to the fireplace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40377:When the last knot had been tied, Thénardier took a chair and seated
tests/les_miserables.txt:40378:himself almost facing M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40380:Thénardier no longer looked like himself; in the course of a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:40381:moments his face had passed from unbridled violence to tranquil and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40382:cunning sweetness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40384:Marius found it difficult to recognize in that polished smile of a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:40385:in official life the almost bestial mouth which had been foaming but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40386:moment before; he gazed with amazement on that fantastic and alarming
tests/les_miserables.txt:40388:tiger converted into a lawyer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40393:on M. Leblanc:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40403:have broken your leg. Now, if you will permit me, we will converse
tests/les_miserables.txt:40404:quietly. In the first place, I must communicate to you an observation
tests/les_miserables.txt:40405:which I have made which is, that you have not uttered the faintest
tests/les_miserables.txt:40406:cry.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40409:Thénardier was right, this detail was correct, although it had escaped
tests/les_miserables.txt:40410:Marius in his agitation. M. Leblanc had barely pronounced a few words,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40411:without raising his voice, and even during his struggle with the six
tests/les_miserables.txt:40413:singular silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40415:Thénardier continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40418:have thought it improper. ‘Murder!’ That, too, is said occasionally,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40419:and, so far as I am concerned, I should not have taken it in bad part.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40421:yourself with persons who don’t inspire you with sufficient confidence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40423:account. You would not even have been gagged. And I will tell you why.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40424:This room is very private. That’s its only recommendation, but it has
tests/les_miserables.txt:40425:that in its favor. You might fire off a mortar and it would produce
tests/les_miserables.txt:40426:about as much noise at the nearest police station as the snores of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40427:drunken man. Here a cannon would make a _boum_, and the thunder would
tests/les_miserables.txt:40429:and it is better so. I present you my compliments, and I will tell you
tests/les_miserables.txt:40430:the conclusion that I draw from that fact: My dear sir, when a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:40431:shouts, who comes? The police. And after the police? Justice. Well! You
tests/les_miserables.txt:40432:have not made an outcry; that is because you don’t care to have the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40433:police and the courts come in any more than we do. It is because,—I
tests/les_miserables.txt:40434:have long suspected it,—you have some interest in hiding something. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:40435:our side we have the same interest. So we can come to an
tests/les_miserables.txt:40440:fixed on M. Leblanc, were trying to plunge the sharp points which
tests/les_miserables.txt:40441:darted from the pupils into the very conscience of his prisoner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40442:Moreover, his language, which was stamped with a sort of moderated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40443:subdued insolence and crafty insolence, was reserved and almost choice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40444:and in that rascal, who had been nothing but a robber a short time
tests/les_miserables.txt:40448:The silence preserved by the prisoner, that precaution which had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:40449:carried to the point of forgetting all anxiety for his own life, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:40450:resistance opposed to the first impulse of nature, which is to utter a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40451:cry, all this, it must be confessed, now that his attention had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:40452:called to it, troubled Marius, and affected him with painful
tests/les_miserables.txt:40455:Thénardier’s well-grounded observation still further obscured for
tests/les_miserables.txt:40456:Marius the dense mystery which enveloped that grave and singular person
tests/les_miserables.txt:40457:on whom Courfeyrac had bestowed the sobriquet of Monsieur Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40459:But whoever he was, bound with ropes, surrounded with executioners,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40460:half plunged, so to speak, in a grave which was closing in upon him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:40461:the extent of a degree with every moment that passed, in the presence
tests/les_miserables.txt:40462:of Thénardier’s wrath, as in the presence of his sweetness, this man
tests/les_miserables.txt:40463:remained impassive; and Marius could not refrain from admiring at such
tests/les_miserables.txt:40464:a moment the superbly melancholy visage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40466:Here, evidently, was a soul which was inaccessible to terror, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:40468:command amazement in desperate circumstances. Extreme as was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40469:crisis, inevitable as was the catastrophe, there was nothing here of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40473:Thénardier rose in an unpretending manner, went to the fireplace,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40474:shoved aside the screen, which he leaned against the neighboring
tests/les_miserables.txt:40475:pallet, and thus unmasked the brazier full of glowing coals, in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:40476:the prisoner could plainly see the chisel white-hot and spotted here
tests/les_miserables.txt:40477:and there with tiny scarlet stars.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40479:Then Thénardier returned to his seat beside M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40481:“I continue,” said he. “We can come to an understanding. Let us arrange
tests/les_miserables.txt:40482:this matter in an amicable way. I was wrong to lose my temper just now,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40484:said extravagant things. For example, because you are a millionnaire, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:40485:told you that I exacted money, a lot of money, a deal of money. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:40486:would not be reasonable. Mon Dieu, in spite of your riches, you have
tests/les_miserables.txt:40488:greedy fellow, after all. I am not one of those people who, because
tests/les_miserables.txt:40489:they have the advantage of the position, profit by the fact to make
tests/les_miserables.txt:40490:themselves ridiculous. Why, I’m taking things into consideration and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40491:making a sacrifice on my side. I only want two hundred thousand
tests/les_miserables.txt:40492:francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40495:M. Leblanc uttered not a word.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40501:stick at money, and a benevolent man like yourself can certainly give
tests/les_miserables.txt:40502:two hundred thousand francs to the father of a family who is out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40503:luck. Certainly, you are reasonable, too; you haven’t imagined that I
tests/les_miserables.txt:40505:this evening, which has been labor well bestowed, in the opinion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40508:thousand francs—it’s surely worth all that. This trifle once out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40509:your pocket, I guarantee you that that’s the end of the matter, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40511:haven’t two hundred thousand francs about me.’ Oh! I’m not
tests/les_miserables.txt:40513:the goodness to write what I am about to dictate to you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40517:casting a smile in the direction of the brazier:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40524:Thénardier pushed the table close to M. Leblanc, and took an inkstand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40525:a pen, and a sheet of paper from the drawer which he left half open,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40526:and in which gleamed the long blade of the knife.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40528:He placed the sheet of paper before M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40534:“How do you expect me to write? I am bound.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40537:“That’s true, excuse me!” ejaculated Thénardier, “you are quite right.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40545:Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille, executed Thénardier’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:40552:discretion, that no human power can get you out of this, and that we
tests/les_miserables.txt:40553:shall be really grieved if we are forced to proceed to disagreeable
tests/les_miserables.txt:40555:you, that you will remain bound until the person charged with carrying
tests/les_miserables.txt:40556:the letter which you are about to write shall have returned. Now, be so
tests/les_miserables.txt:40562:“I will dictate.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40565:M. Leblanc took the pen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40567:Thénardier began to dictate:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40576:M. Leblanc obeyed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40578:Thénardier continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40588:“Who?” asked M. Leblanc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40590:“Parbleu!” cried Thénardier, “the little one, the Lark.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40593:M. Leblanc replied without the slightest apparent emotion:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40598:“Go on, nevertheless,” ejaculated Thénardier, and he continued to
tests/les_miserables.txt:40599:dictate:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40602:deliver this note to thee is instructed to conduct thee to me. I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:40603:waiting for thee. Come with confidence.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40606:M. Leblanc had written the whole of this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40610:“Ah! erase ‘come with confidence’; that might lead her to suppose that
tests/les_miserables.txt:40614:M. Leblanc erased the three words.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40630:pronounce her name—the precaution of a clever man guarding his secret
tests/les_miserables.txt:40631:from his accomplices. To mention the name was to deliver the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:40642:Thénardier, with the movement of a cat, dashed his hand into his pocket
tests/les_miserables.txt:40643:and drew out the handkerchief which had been seized on M. Leblanc. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:40644:looked for the mark on it, and held it close to the candle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40658:a long distance from here, near Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, because you
tests/les_miserables.txt:40671:Thénardier seized the letter with a sort of feverish convulsion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40673:“Wife!” he cried.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40677:“Here’s the letter. You know what you have to do. There is a carriage
tests/les_miserables.txt:40678:at the door. Set out at once, and return ditto.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40683:“Since you have taken off your nose-screen, accompany the mistress. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:40684:will get up behind the fiacre. You know where you left the team?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40689:And depositing his axe in a corner, he followed Madame Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40692:and shouted into the corridor:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40694:“Above all things, don’t lose the letter! remember that you carry two
tests/les_miserables.txt:40695:hundred thousand francs with you!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40698:The Thénardier’s hoarse voice replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40703:A minute had not elapsed, when the sound of the cracking of a whip was
tests/les_miserables.txt:40704:heard, which rapidly retreated and died away.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40706:“Good!” growled Thénardier. “They’re going at a fine pace. At such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40707:gallop, the bourgeoise will be back inside three-quarters of an hour.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40710:He drew a chair close to the fireplace, folding his arms, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40713:“My feet are cold!” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40718:These men, through the black masks or paste which covered their faces,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40719:and made of them, at fear’s pleasure, charcoal-burners, negroes, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:40720:demons, had a stupid and gloomy air, and it could be felt that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:40721:perpetrated a crime like a bit of work, tranquilly, without either
tests/les_miserables.txt:40722:wrath or mercy, with a sort of ennui. They were crowded together in one
tests/les_miserables.txt:40723:corner like brutes, and remained silent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40727:The prisoner had relapsed into his taciturnity. A sombre calm had
tests/les_miserables.txt:40728:succeeded to the wild uproar which had filled the garret but a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:40731:The candle, on which a large “stranger” had formed, cast but a dim
tests/les_miserables.txt:40733:monstrous heads cast misshapen shadows on the walls and ceiling.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40735:No sound was audible except the quiet breathing of the old drunken man,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40741:Who was this “little one” whom Thénardier had called the Lark? Was she
tests/les_miserables.txt:40742:his “Ursule”? The prisoner had not seemed to be affected by that word,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40746:Ursule. This was what Marius perceived most clearly of all.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40748:A sort of horrible fascination held him nailed to his post, from which
tests/les_miserables.txt:40749:he was observing and commanding this whole scene. There he stood,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40750:almost incapable of movement or reflection, as though annihilated by
tests/les_miserables.txt:40751:the abominable things viewed at such close quarters. He waited, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40752:hope of some incident, no matter of what nature, since he could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:40753:collect his thoughts and did not know upon what course to decide.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40755:“In any case,” he said, “if she is the Lark, I shall see her, for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40757:I will give my life and my blood if necessary, but I will deliver her!
tests/les_miserables.txt:40762:absorbed in gloomy reflections, the prisoner did not stir. Still,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40763:Marius fancied that at intervals, and for the last few moments, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:40764:heard a faint, dull noise in the direction of the prisoner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40766:All at once, Thénardier addressed the prisoner:
tests/les_miserables.txt:40768:“By the way, Monsieur Fabre, I might as well say it to you at once.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40774:“My wife will be back shortly, don’t get impatient. I think that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40778:did, so that your young lady might make no difficulty about following
tests/les_miserables.txt:40779:her. They will both enter the carriage with my comrade behind.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40782:the fiacre. My comrade will enter the other vehicle with her, and my
tests/les_miserables.txt:40783:wife will come back here to tell us: ‘It’s done.’ As for the young
tests/les_miserables.txt:40784:lady, no harm will be done to her; the trap will conduct her to a place
tests/les_miserables.txt:40786:those little two hundred thousand francs, she will be returned to you.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40787:If you have me arrested, my comrade will give a turn of his thumb to
tests/les_miserables.txt:40792:continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40799:He paused: the prisoner did not break the silence, and Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:40808:they were abducting was not to be brought back? One of those monsters
tests/les_miserables.txt:40812:It was clear that it was she. Marius felt his heart stop beating.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40814:What was he to do? Discharge the pistol? Place all those scoundrels in
tests/les_miserables.txt:40815:the hands of justice? But the horrible man with the meat-axe would,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40816:nonetheless, be out of reach with the young girl, and Marius reflected
tests/les_miserables.txt:40817:on Thénardier’s words, of which he perceived the bloody significance:
tests/les_miserables.txt:40818:“If you have me arrested, my comrade will give a turn of his thumb to
tests/les_miserables.txt:40822:Now, it was not alone by the colonel’s testament, it was by his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:40826:This frightful situation, which had already lasted above half an hour,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40827:was changing its aspect every moment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40829:Marius had sufficient strength of mind to review in succession all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40830:most heart-breaking conjectures, seeking hope and finding none.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40832:The tumult of his thoughts contrasted with the funereal silence of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40835:In the midst of this silence, the door at the bottom of the staircase
tests/les_miserables.txt:40842:He had hardly uttered the words, when the Thénardier woman did in fact
tests/les_miserables.txt:40844:eyes, and cried, as she smote her huge hands on her thighs
tests/les_miserables.txt:40850:The ruffian who had gone with her made his appearance behind her and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40851:picked up his axe again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40859:She paused, choking, then went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:40862:you see! If it had been me, I’d have chopped the beast in four quarters
tests/les_miserables.txt:40863:to begin with! And if he had acted ugly, I’d have boiled him alive! He
tests/les_miserables.txt:40866:People are perfectly right when they say that men are a deal stupider
tests/les_miserables.txt:40867:than women! Nobody at No. 17. It’s nothing but a big carriage gate! No
tests/les_miserables.txt:40868:Monsieur Fabre in the Rue Saint-Dominique! And after all that racing
tests/les_miserables.txt:40869:and fee to the coachman and all! I spoke to both the porter and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40873:Marius breathed freely once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40875:She, Ursule or the Lark, he no longer knew what to call her, was safe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40877:While his exasperated wife vociferated, Thénardier had seated himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:40881:which hung down, and stared at the brazier with an air of savage
tests/les_miserables.txt:40884:Finally, he said to the prisoner, with a slow and singularly ferocious
tests/les_miserables.txt:40887:“A false address? What did you expect to gain by that?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40890:“To gain time!” cried the prisoner in a thundering voice, and at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40891:same instant he shook off his bonds; they were cut. The prisoner was
tests/les_miserables.txt:40892:only attached to the bed now by one leg.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40894:Before the seven men had time to collect their senses and dash forward,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40895:he had bent down into the fireplace, had stretched out his hand to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40898:amazement at the extremity of the hovel, stared at him in stupefaction,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40900:head the red-hot chisel, which emitted a threatening glow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40902:The judicial examination to which the ambush in the Gorbeau house
tests/les_miserables.txt:40903:eventually gave rise, established the fact that a large sou piece, cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:40904:and worked in a peculiar fashion, was found in the garret, when the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40905:police made their descent on it. This sou piece was one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:40906:marvels of industry, which are engendered by the patience of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40907:galleys in the shadows and for the shadows, marvels which are nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:40908:else than instruments of escape. These hideous and delicate products of
tests/les_miserables.txt:40911:Villons in language. The unhappy wretch who aspires to deliverance
tests/les_miserables.txt:40912:finds means sometimes without tools, sometimes with a common
tests/les_miserables.txt:40914:these plates without affecting the coinage stamp, and to make a furrow
tests/les_miserables.txt:40915:on the edge of the sou in such a manner that the plates will adhere
tests/les_miserables.txt:40916:again. This can be screwed together and unscrewed at will; it is a box.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40917:In this box he hides a watch-spring, and this watch-spring, properly
tests/les_miserables.txt:40918:handled, cuts good-sized chains and bars of iron. The unfortunate
tests/les_miserables.txt:40919:convict is supposed to possess merely a sou; not at all, he possesses
tests/les_miserables.txt:40920:liberty. It was a large sou of this sort which, during the subsequent
tests/les_miserables.txt:40921:search of the police, was found under the bed near the window. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:40922:also found a tiny saw of blue steel which would fit the sou.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40924:It is probable that the prisoner had this sou piece on his person at
tests/les_miserables.txt:40925:the moment when the ruffians searched him, that he contrived to conceal
tests/les_miserables.txt:40927:unscrewed it, and used it as a saw to cut the cords which fastened him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40928:which would explain the faint noise and almost imperceptible movements
tests/les_miserables.txt:40929:which Marius had observed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40932:had not cut the bonds of his left leg.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40934:The ruffians had recovered from their first surprise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40937:and he can’t get away. I’ll answer for that. I tied that paw for him.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40942:“You are wretches, but my life is not worth the trouble of defending
tests/les_miserables.txt:40943:it. When you think that you can make me speak, that you can make me
tests/les_miserables.txt:40944:write what I do not choose to write, that you can make me say what I do
tests/les_miserables.txt:40945:not choose to say—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40953:At the same moment he extended his arm, and laid the glowing chisel
tests/les_miserables.txt:40954:which he held in his left hand by its wooden handle on his bare flesh.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40956:The crackling of the burning flesh became audible, and the odor
tests/les_miserables.txt:40957:peculiar to chambers of torture filled the hovel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40962:muscle of the old man’s face contracted, and while the red-hot iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:40964:Thénardier his beautiful glance, in which there was no hatred, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:40968:when subjected to physical suffering cause the soul to spring forth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40970:force the captain to show himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:40972:“Wretches!” said he, “have no more fear of me than I have for you!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:40975:And, tearing the chisel from the wound, he hurled it through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:40976:window, which had been left open; the horrible, glowing tool
tests/les_miserables.txt:40987:man with the ventriloquist’s voice took up his station in front of him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:40991:but so near that he could not see who was speaking, this colloquy
tests/les_miserables.txt:40992:conducted in a low tone:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41003:It was the husband and wife taking counsel together.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41007:Unprecedented perplexity! For the last hour he had had two voices in
tests/les_miserables.txt:41008:his conscience, the one enjoining him to respect his father’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:41009:testament, the other crying to him to rescue the prisoner. These two
tests/les_miserables.txt:41010:voices continued uninterruptedly that struggle which tormented him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41011:agony. Up to that moment he had cherished a vague hope that he should
tests/les_miserables.txt:41012:find some means of reconciling these two duties, but nothing within the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41016:reached; Thénardier was standing thoughtfully a few paces distant from
tests/les_miserables.txt:41019:Marius cast a wild glance about him, the last mechanical resource of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41020:despair. All at once a shudder ran through him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41030:An idea, a flash, crossed Marius’ mind; this was the expedient of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:41031:he was in search, the solution of that frightful problem which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:41032:torturing him, of sparing the assassin and saving the victim.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41034:He knelt down on his commode, stretched out his arm, seized the sheet
tests/les_miserables.txt:41035:of paper, softly detached a bit of plaster from the wall, wrapped the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41036:paper round it, and tossed the whole through the crevice into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41039:It was high time. Thénardier had conquered his last fears or his last
tests/les_miserables.txt:41040:scruples, and was advancing on the prisoner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41042:“Something is falling!” cried the Thénardier woman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41046:The woman darted forward and picked up the bit of plaster. She handed
tests/les_miserables.txt:41049:“Where did this come from?” demanded Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41051:“Pardie!” ejaculated his wife, “where do you suppose it came from?
tests/les_miserables.txt:41052:Through the window, of course.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41057:Thénardier rapidly unfolded the paper and held it close to the candle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41063:line written on the sheet of paper, then he added in a subdued voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41065:“Quick! The ladder! Let’s leave the bacon in the mousetrap and decamp!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41068:“Without cutting that man’s throat?” asked, the Thénardier woman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41075:“Through the window,” replied Thénardier. “Since Ponine has thrown the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41076:stone through the window, it indicates that the house is not watched on
tests/les_miserables.txt:41080:The mask with the ventriloquist’s voice deposited his huge key on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41081:floor, raised both arms in the air, and opened and clenched his fists,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41084:This was the signal like the signal for clearing the decks for action
tests/les_miserables.txt:41094:As soon as the ladder was arranged, Thénardier cried:
tests/les_miserables.txt:41102:roughly by the collar.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41104:“Not much, come now, you old dog, after us!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41109:“You are children,” said Thénardier, “we are losing time. The police
tests/les_miserables.txt:41117:Thénardier exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41119:“Are you mad! Are you crazy! What a pack of boobies! You want to waste
tests/les_miserables.txt:41124:“Would you like my hat?” cried a voice on the threshold.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41138:himself between the trees of the Rue de la Barrière-des-Gobelins which
tests/les_miserables.txt:41139:faced the Gorbeau house, on the other side of the boulevard. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:41140:begun operations by opening “his pockets,” and dropping into it the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:41141:young girls who were charged with keeping a watch on the approaches to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41142:the den. But he had only “caged” Azelma. As for Éponine, she was not at
tests/les_miserables.txt:41145:signal agreed upon. The comings and goings of the fiacres had greatly
tests/les_miserables.txt:41147:was a nest there_, sure of being in “luck,” having recognized many of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41148:the ruffians who had entered, he had finally decided to go upstairs
tests/les_miserables.txt:41153:He had arrived just in the nick of time.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41155:The terrified ruffians flung themselves on the arms which they had
tests/les_miserables.txt:41156:abandoned in all the corners at the moment of flight. In less than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41157:second, these seven men, horrible to behold, had grouped themselves in
tests/les_miserables.txt:41158:an attitude of defence, one with his meat-axe, another with his key,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41159:another with his bludgeon, the rest with shears, pincers, and hammers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41160:Thénardier had his knife in his fist. The Thénardier woman snatched up
tests/les_miserables.txt:41161:an enormous paving-stone which lay in the angle of the window and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41164:[Illustration: Snatched up a Paving Stone]
tests/les_miserables.txt:41166:Javert put on his hat again, and advanced a couple of paces into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41167:room, with arms folded, his cane under one arm, his sword in its
tests/les_miserables.txt:41172:are fifteen of us. Don’t let’s fall to collaring each other like men of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41176:Bigrenaille drew out a pistol which he had kept concealed under his
tests/les_miserables.txt:41190:Javert, who was only three paces from him, stared intently at him and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41191:contented himself with saying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41198:“Didn’t I tell you so!” ejaculated Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41212:Javert began again calmly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41214:“That’s right, that’s good, I said so, you are nice fellows.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41218:be denied tobacco while I am in confinement.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41223:And turning round and calling behind him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41228:A squad of policemen, sword in hand, and agents armed with bludgeons
tests/les_miserables.txt:41229:and cudgels, rushed in at Javert’s summons. They pinioned the ruffians.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41231:This throng of men, sparely lighted by the single candle, filled the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41234:“Handcuff them all!” shouted Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41236:“Come on!” cried a voice which was not the voice of a man, but of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:41237:no one would ever have said: “It is a woman’s voice.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41240:The Thénardier woman had entrenched herself in one of the angles of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41243:The policemen and agents recoiled.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41246:was crouching behind her, was almost hidden under the discarded shawl,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41249:of hurling a rock.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41253:All crowded back towards the corridor. A broad open space was cleared
tests/les_miserables.txt:41256:The Thénardier woman cast a glance at the ruffians who had allowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:41258:accents:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41260:“The cowards!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41263:Javert smiled, and advanced across the open space which the Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:41266:“Don’t come near me,” she cried, “or I’ll crush you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41269:“What a grenadier!” ejaculated Javert; “you’ve got a beard like a man,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41270:mother, but I have claws like a woman.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41273:And he continued to advance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41276:herself backwards, and hurled the paving-stone at Javert’s head. Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:41277:ducked, the stone passed over him, struck the wall behind, knocked off
tests/les_miserables.txt:41278:a huge piece of plastering, and, rebounding from angle to angle across
tests/les_miserables.txt:41279:the hovel, now luckily almost empty, rested at Javert’s feet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41281:At the same moment, Javert reached the Thénardier couple. One of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:41282:big hands descended on the woman’s shoulder; the other on the husband’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:41285:“The handcuffs!” he shouted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41287:The policemen trooped in in force, and in a few seconds Javert’s order
tests/les_miserables.txt:41288:had been executed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41291:at those of her husband, who had dropped to the floor, and exclaimed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41299:In the meanwhile, the agents had caught sight of the drunken man asleep
tests/les_miserables.txt:41310:spectral mien; all three besmeared with black, all three masked.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41314:And passing them in review with a glance of a Frederick II. at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41315:Potsdam parade, he said to the three “chimney-builders”:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41326:And to the man with the cudgel:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41336:At that moment, he caught sight of the ruffians’ prisoner, who, ever
tests/les_miserables.txt:41337:since the entrance of the police, had not uttered a word, and had held
tests/les_miserables.txt:41344:where the candle and the writing-materials still remained, drew a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41345:stamped paper from his pocket, and began to prepare his report.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41347:When he had written the first lines, which are formulas that never
tests/les_miserables.txt:41353:The policemen glanced round them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41358:The prisoner of the ruffians, M. Leblanc, M. Urbain Fabre, the father
tests/les_miserables.txt:41363:report, he had taken advantage of confusion, the crowd, the darkness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41371:“The devil!” ejaculated Javert between his teeth, “he must have been
tests/les_miserables.txt:41381:On the day following that on which these events took place in the house
tests/les_miserables.txt:41382:on the Boulevard de l’Hôpital, a child, who seemed to be coming from
tests/les_miserables.txt:41383:the direction of the bridge of Austerlitz, was ascending the side-alley
tests/les_miserables.txt:41384:on the right in the direction of the Barrière de Fontainebleau.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41386:Night had fully come.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41388:This lad was pale, thin, clad in rags, with linen trousers in the month
tests/les_miserables.txt:41389:of February, and was singing at the top of his voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41391:At the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier, a bent old woman was
tests/les_miserables.txt:41393:child jostled her as he passed, then recoiled, exclaiming:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41398:He pronounced the word _enormous_ the second time with a jeering swell
tests/les_miserables.txt:41399:of the voice which might be tolerably well represented by capitals: “an
tests/les_miserables.txt:41411:“Kisss! kisss!” he cried. “After that, I don’t think I was mistaken!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41414:The old woman, choking with indignation, now rose completely upright,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41415:and the red gleam of the lantern fully lighted up her livid face, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:41416:hollowed into angles and wrinkles, with crow’s-feet meeting the corners
tests/les_miserables.txt:41420:would have pronounced her a mask of Decrepitude carved out by a light
tests/les_miserables.txt:41425:“Madame,” said he, “does not possess that style of beauty which pleases
tests/les_miserables.txt:41432:S’en allait à la chasse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41433:À la chasse aux corbeaux—”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41438:resounding and heroic kicks, which betrayed rather the man’s shoes that
tests/les_miserables.txt:41439:he was wearing than the child’s feet which he owned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41441:In the meanwhile, the very old woman whom he had encountered at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41442:corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier hastened up behind him, uttering
tests/les_miserables.txt:41443:clamorous cries and indulging in lavish and exaggerated gestures.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41446:knocking the house down.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41449:The kicks continued.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41456:All at once she paused.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41458:She had recognized the gamin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41463:“Why, it’s the old lady,” said the lad. “Good day, Bougonmuche. I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:41464:come to see my ancestors.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41467:The old woman retorted with a composite grimace, and a wonderful
tests/les_miserables.txt:41469:which was, unfortunately, wasted in the dark:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41477:“At La Force.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41492:The lad scratched his head behind his ear, stared at Ma’am Bougon, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41498:Then he executed a pirouette on his heel; a moment later, the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:41500:clear, young voice, as he plunged under the black elm-trees, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41504:S’en allait à la chasse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41505:À la chasse aux corbeaux,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41506:Monté sur deux échasses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41522:[Illustration: Frontispiece Volume Four]
tests/les_miserables.txt:41539:1831 and 1832, the two years which are immediately connected with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41540:Revolution of July, form one of the most peculiar and striking moments
tests/les_miserables.txt:41542:those which precede and those which follow them. They have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41543:revolutionary grandeur. Precipices are to be distinguished there. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:41544:social masses, the very assizes of civilization, the solid group of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41545:superposed and adhering interests, the century-old profiles of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41546:ancient French formation, appear and disappear in them every instant,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41547:athwart the storm clouds of systems, of passions, and of theories.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41548:These appearances and disappearances have been designated as movement
tests/les_miserables.txt:41549:and resistance. At intervals, truth, that daylight of the human soul,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41550:can be descried shining there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41552:This remarkable epoch is decidedly circumscribed and is beginning to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:41553:sufficiently distant from us to allow of our grasping the principal
tests/les_miserables.txt:41559:define, in which there is fatigue, buzzing, murmurs, sleep, tumult, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41560:which are nothing else than the arrival of a great nation at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41561:halting-place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41563:These epochs are peculiar and mislead the politicians who desire to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41564:convert them to profit. In the beginning, the nation asks nothing but
tests/les_miserables.txt:41565:repose; it thirsts for but one thing, peace; it has but one ambition,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41566:to be small. Which is the translation of remaining tranquil. Of great
tests/les_miserables.txt:41569:exchange Cæsar for Prusias, and Napoleon for the King of Yvetot. “What
tests/les_miserables.txt:41570:a good little king was he!” We have marched since daybreak, we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:41571:reached the evening of a long and toilsome day; we have made our first
tests/les_miserables.txt:41572:change with Mirabeau, the second with Robespierre, the third with
tests/les_miserables.txt:41573:Bonaparte; we are worn out. Each one demands a bed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41575:Devotion which is weary, heroism which has grown old, ambitions which
tests/les_miserables.txt:41576:are sated, fortunes which are made, seek, demand, implore, solicit,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41577:what? A shelter. They have it. They take possession of peace, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41578:tranquillity, of leisure; behold, they are content. But, at the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:41579:time certain facts arise, compel recognition, and knock at the door in
tests/les_miserables.txt:41580:their turn. These facts are the products of revolutions and wars, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:41581:are, they exist, they have the right to install themselves in society,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41582:and they do install themselves therein; and most of the time, facts are
tests/les_miserables.txt:41584:lodgings for principles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41586:This, then, is what appears to philosophical politicians:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41588:At the same time that weary men demand repose, accomplished facts
tests/les_miserables.txt:41589:demand guarantees. Guarantees are the same to facts that repose is to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41592:This is what England demanded of the Stuarts after the Protector; this
tests/les_miserables.txt:41593:is what France demanded of the Bourbons after the Empire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41595:These guarantees are a necessity of the times. They must be accorded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41596:Princes “grant” them, but in reality, it is the force of things which
tests/les_miserables.txt:41597:gives them. A profound truth, and one useful to know, which the Stuarts
tests/les_miserables.txt:41598:did not suspect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41601:The predestined family, which returned to France when Napoleon fell,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41602:had the fatal simplicity to believe that it was itself which bestowed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41603:and that what it had bestowed it could take back again; that the House
tests/les_miserables.txt:41604:of Bourbon possessed the right divine, that France possessed nothing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41605:and that the political right conceded in the charter of Louis XVIII.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41606:was merely a branch of the right divine, was detached by the House of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41607:Bourbon and graciously given to the people until such day as it should
tests/les_miserables.txt:41609:felt, from the displeasure created by the gift, that it did not come
tests/les_miserables.txt:41612:This house was churlish to the nineteenth century. It put on an
tests/les_miserables.txt:41617:It thought it possessed strength because the Empire had been carried
tests/les_miserables.txt:41618:away before it like a theatrical stage-setting. It did not perceive
tests/les_miserables.txt:41620:perceive that it also lay in that hand which had removed Napoleon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41622:It thought that it had roots, because it was the past. It was mistaken;
tests/les_miserables.txt:41623:it formed a part of the past, but the whole past was France. The roots
tests/les_miserables.txt:41624:of French society were not fixed in the Bourbons, but in the nations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41625:These obscure and lively roots constituted, not the right of a family,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41626:but the history of a people. They were everywhere, except under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41629:The House of Bourbon was to France the illustrious and bleeding knot in
tests/les_miserables.txt:41630:her history, but was no longer the principal element of her destiny,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41631:and the necessary base of her politics. She could get along without the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41633:been a break of continuity; they did not suspect the fact. And how
tests/les_miserables.txt:41634:should they have suspected it, they who fancied that Louis XVII.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41636:the battle of Marengo? Never, since the origin of history, had princes
tests/les_miserables.txt:41637:been so blind in the presence of facts and the portion of divine
tests/les_miserables.txt:41638:authority which facts contain and promulgate. Never had that pretension
tests/les_miserables.txt:41639:here below which is called the right of kings denied to such a point
tests/les_miserables.txt:41642:A capital error which led this family to lay its hand once more on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41643:guarantees “granted” in 1814, on the concessions, as it termed them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41644:Sad. A sad thing! What it termed its concessions were our conquests;
tests/les_miserables.txt:41645:what it termed our encroachments were our rights.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41647:When the hour seemed to it to have come, the Restoration, supposing
tests/les_miserables.txt:41648:itself victorious over Bonaparte and well-rooted in the country, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:41649:is to say, believing itself to be strong and deep, abruptly decided on
tests/les_miserables.txt:41650:its plan of action, and risked its stroke. One morning it drew itself
tests/les_miserables.txt:41651:up before the face of France, and, elevating its voice, it contested
tests/les_miserables.txt:41652:the collective title and the individual right of the nation to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41653:sovereignty, of the citizen to liberty. In other words, it denied to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41654:the nation that which made it a nation, and to the citizen that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:41655:made him a citizen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41657:This is the foundation of those famous acts which are called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41658:ordinances of July. The Restoration fell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41661:all forms of progress. Great things had been accomplished, with it
tests/les_miserables.txt:41664:Under the Restoration, the nation had grown accustomed to calm
tests/les_miserables.txt:41665:discussion, which had been lacking under the Republic, and to grandeur
tests/les_miserables.txt:41666:in peace, which had been wanting under the Empire. France free and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41667:strong had offered an encouraging spectacle to the other peoples of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41668:Europe. The Revolution had had the word under Robespierre; the cannon
tests/les_miserables.txt:41670:X. that it was the turn of intelligence to have the word. The wind
tests/les_miserables.txt:41671:ceased, the torch was lighted once more. On the lofty heights, the pure
tests/les_miserables.txt:41672:light of mind could be seen flickering. A magnificent, useful, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41673:charming spectacle. For a space of fifteen years, those great
tests/les_miserables.txt:41674:principles which are so old for the thinker, so new for the statesman,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41675:could be seen at work in perfect peace, on the public square; equality
tests/les_miserables.txt:41676:before the law, liberty of conscience, liberty of speech, liberty of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41677:the press, the accessibility of all aptitudes to all functions. Thus it
tests/les_miserables.txt:41678:proceeded until 1830. The Bourbons were an instrument of civilization
tests/les_miserables.txt:41679:which broke in the hands of Providence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41683:without authority; their descent into the night was not one of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:41684:solemn disappearances which leave a sombre emotion in history; it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:41685:neither the spectral calm of Charles I., nor the eagle scream of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41686:Napoleon. They departed, that is all. They laid down the crown, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41688:lacked, in a certain measure, the majesty of their misfortune. Charles
tests/les_miserables.txt:41689:X. during the voyage from Cherbourg, causing a round table to be cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:41691:etiquette than about the crumbling monarchy. This diminution saddened
tests/les_miserables.txt:41693:race. The populace was admirable. The nation, attacked one morning with
tests/les_miserables.txt:41694:weapons, by a sort of royal insurrection, felt itself in the possession
tests/les_miserables.txt:41695:of so much force that it did not go into a rage. It defended itself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41696:restrained itself, restored things to their places, the government to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41698:Charles X. from beneath that dais which had sheltered Louis XIV. and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41699:set him gently on the ground. It touched the royal personages only with
tests/les_miserables.txt:41700:sadness and precaution. It was not one man, it was not a few men, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:41701:was France, France entire, France victorious and intoxicated with her
tests/les_miserables.txt:41702:victory, who seemed to be coming to herself, and who put into practice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41704:Vair after the day of the Barricades:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:41706:“It is easy for those who are accustomed to skim the favors of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41708:afflicted fortune to a flourishing one, to show themselves harsh
tests/les_miserables.txt:41709:towards their Prince in his adversity; but as for me, the fortune of my
tests/les_miserables.txt:41710:Kings and especially of my afflicted Kings, will always be venerable to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41714:The Bourbons carried away with them respect, but not regret. As we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:41720:others turned away, each according to his nature. At the first blush,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41721:the princes of Europe, the owls of this dawn, shut their eyes, wounded
tests/les_miserables.txt:41722:and stupefied, and only opened them to threaten. A fright which can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:41723:comprehended, a wrath which can be pardoned. This strange revolution
tests/les_miserables.txt:41724:had hardly produced a shock; it had not even paid to vanquished royalty
tests/les_miserables.txt:41726:eyes of despotic governments, who are always interested in having
tests/les_miserables.txt:41727:liberty calumniate itself, the Revolution of July committed the fault
tests/les_miserables.txt:41729:attempted or plotted against it. The most discontented, the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:41731:rancor may be, a mysterious respect springs from events in which we are
tests/les_miserables.txt:41732:sensible of the collaboration of some one who is working above man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41734:The Revolution of July is the triumph of right overthrowing the fact. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:41735:thing which is full of splendor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41737:Right overthrowing the fact. Hence the brilliancy of the Revolution of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41738:1830, hence, also, its mildness. Right triumphant has no need of being
tests/les_miserables.txt:41744:fact, even when most necessary to all appearances, even when most
tests/les_miserables.txt:41745:thoroughly accepted by contemporaries, if it exist only as a fact, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41746:if it contain only too little of right, or none at all, is infallibly
tests/les_miserables.txt:41747:destined to become, in the course of time, deformed, impure, perhaps,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41749:hideousness the fact can attain, viewed at the distance of centuries,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41750:let him look at Machiavelli. Machiavelli is not an evil genius, nor a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41751:demon, nor a miserable and cowardly writer; he is nothing but the fact.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41752:And he is not only the Italian fact; he is the European fact, the fact
tests/les_miserables.txt:41753:of the sixteenth century. He seems hideous, and so he is, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41754:presence of the moral idea of the nineteenth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41756:This conflict of right and fact has been going on ever since the origin
tests/les_miserables.txt:41757:of society. To terminate this duel, to amalgamate the pure idea with
tests/les_miserables.txt:41758:the humane reality, to cause right to penetrate pacifically into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41759:fact and the fact into right, that is the task of sages.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41767:But the task of sages is one thing, the task of clever men is another.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41768:The Revolution of 1830 came to a sudden halt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41770:As soon as a revolution has made the coast, the skilful make haste to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41771:prepare the shipwreck.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41773:The skilful in our century have conferred on themselves the title of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41774:Statesmen; so that this word, _statesmen_, has ended by becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:41775:somewhat of a slang word. It must be borne in mind, in fact, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:41776:wherever there is nothing but skill, there is necessarily pettiness. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:41777:say “the skilful” amounts to saying “the mediocre.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:41783:indispensable. The right, too grandly proclaimed, is shaken. Also,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41784:right once firmly fixed, the state must be strengthened. Liberty once
tests/les_miserables.txt:41785:assured, attention must be directed to power.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41788:begin to be distrustful. Power, very good. But, in the first place,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41789:what is power? In the second, whence comes it? The skilful do not seem
tests/les_miserables.txt:41790:to hear the murmured objection, and they continue their manœuvres.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41792:According to the politicians, who are ingenious in putting the mask of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41793:necessity on profitable fictions, the first requirement of a people
tests/les_miserables.txt:41794:after a revolution, when this people forms part of a monarchical
tests/les_miserables.txt:41795:continent, is to procure for itself a dynasty. In this way, say they,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41796:peace, that is to say, time to dress our wounds, and to repair the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41797:house, can be had after a revolution. The dynasty conceals the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41798:scaffolding and covers the ambulance. Now, it is not always easy to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41799:procure a dynasty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41801:If it is absolutely necessary, the first man of genius or even the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41802:first man of fortune who comes to hand suffices for the manufacturing
tests/les_miserables.txt:41803:of a king. You have, in the first case, Napoleon; in the second,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41806:But the first family that comes to hand does not suffice to make a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41807:dynasty. There is necessarily required a certain modicum of antiquity
tests/les_miserables.txt:41808:in a race, and the wrinkle of the centuries cannot be improvised.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41810:If we place ourselves at the point of view of the “statesmen,” after
tests/les_miserables.txt:41811:making all allowances, of course, after a revolution, what are the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41812:qualities of the king which result from it? He may be and it is useful
tests/les_miserables.txt:41813:for him to be a revolutionary; that is to say, a participant in his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:41815:he should have either compromised or distinguished himself therein,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41816:that he should have touched the axe or wielded the sword in it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41819:say, revolutionary at a distance, not through acts committed, but by
tests/les_miserables.txt:41820:reason of ideas accepted. It should be composed of past and be
tests/les_miserables.txt:41821:historic; be composed of future and be sympathetic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41823:All this explains why the early revolutions contented themselves with
tests/les_miserables.txt:41824:finding a man, Cromwell or Napoleon; and why the second absolutely
tests/les_miserables.txt:41825:insisted on finding a family, the House of Brunswick or the House of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41828:Royal houses resemble those Indian fig-trees, each branch of which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41829:bending over to the earth, takes root and becomes a fig-tree itself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41830:Each branch may become a dynasty. On the sole condition that it shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:41833:Such is the theory of the skilful.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41835:Here, then, lies the great art: to make a little render to success the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41836:sound of a catastrophe in order that those who profit by it may tremble
tests/les_miserables.txt:41838:the curve of the transition to the point of retarding progress, to dull
tests/les_miserables.txt:41839:that aurora, to denounce and retrench the harshness of enthusiasm, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41840:cut all angles and nails, to wad triumph, to muffle up right, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41842:speedily, to impose a diet on that excess of health, to put Hercules on
tests/les_miserables.txt:41843:the treatment of a convalescent, to dilute the event with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41844:expedient, to offer to spirits thirsting for the ideal that nectar
tests/les_miserables.txt:41845:thinned out with a potion, to take one’s precautions against too much
tests/les_miserables.txt:41846:success, to garnish the revolution with a shade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41848:1830 practised this theory, already applied to England by 1688.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41851:Now, logic knows not the “almost,” absolutely as the sun knows not the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41852:candle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41858:Because the bourgeoisie is interest which has reached satisfaction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41862:The phenomenon of 1814 after Napoleon was reproduced in 1830 after
tests/les_miserables.txt:41865:The attempt has been made, and wrongly, to make a class of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41866:bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie is simply the contented portion of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41867:people. The bourgeois is the man who now has time to sit down. A chair
tests/les_miserables.txt:41868:is not a caste.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41871:march of the human race. This has often been the fault of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41874:One is not a class because one has committed a fault. Selfishness is
tests/les_miserables.txt:41875:not one of the divisions of the social order.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41877:Moreover, we must be just to selfishness. The state to which that part
tests/les_miserables.txt:41878:of the nation which is called the bourgeoisie aspired after the shock
tests/les_miserables.txt:41879:of 1830 was not the inertia which is complicated with indifference and
tests/les_miserables.txt:41880:laziness, and which contains a little shame; it was not the slumber
tests/les_miserables.txt:41881:which presupposes a momentary forgetfulness accessible to dreams; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:41884:The halt is a word formed of a singular double and almost contradictory
tests/les_miserables.txt:41885:sense: a troop on the march, that is to say, movement; a stand, that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:41888:The halt is the restoration of forces; it is repose armed and on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41889:alert; it is the accomplished fact which posts sentinels and holds
tests/les_miserables.txt:41892:The halt presupposes the combat of yesterday and the combat of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41897:What we here call combat may also be designated as progress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41900:should express this word Halt. An Although-Because. A composite
tests/les_miserables.txt:41902:terms, strengthening the present by the evident compatibility of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41907:The 221 made Louis Philippe King. Lafayette undertook the coronation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41909:He called it _the best of republics_. The town-hall of Paris took the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41910:place of the Cathedral of Rheims.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41916:When the skilful had finished, the immense vice of their solution
tests/les_miserables.txt:41917:became apparent. All this had been accomplished outside the bounds of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41918:absolute right. Absolute right cried: “I protest!” then, terrible to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41928:and choose well. Even incomplete, even debased and abused and reduced
tests/les_miserables.txt:41930:nearly always retain sufficient providential lucidity to prevent them
tests/les_miserables.txt:41931:from falling amiss. Their eclipse is never an abdication.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41934:deceived, and grave errors have been seen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:41936:Let us return to 1830. 1830, in its deviation, had good luck. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41937:establishment which entitled itself order after the revolution had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:41938:cut short, the King amounted to more than royalty. Louis Philippe was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41941:The son of a father to whom history will accord certain attenuating
tests/les_miserables.txt:41942:circumstances, but also as worthy of esteem as that father had been of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41943:blame; possessing all private virtues and many public virtues; careful
tests/les_miserables.txt:41946:serene, peaceable, patient; a good man and a good prince; sleeping with
tests/les_miserables.txt:41947:his wife, and having in his palace lackeys charged with the duty of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41948:showing the conjugal bed to the bourgeois, an ostentation of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41949:regular sleeping-apartment which had become useful after the former
tests/les_miserables.txt:41950:illegitimate displays of the elder branch; knowing all the languages of
tests/les_miserables.txt:41952:speaking them; an admirable representative of the “middle class,” but
tests/les_miserables.txt:41953:outstripping it, and in every way greater than it; possessing excellent
tests/les_miserables.txt:41954:sense, while appreciating the blood from which he had sprung, counting
tests/les_miserables.txt:41955:most of all on his intrinsic worth, and, on the question of his race,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41956:very particular, declaring himself Orleans and not Bourbon; thoroughly
tests/les_miserables.txt:41957:the first Prince of the Blood Royal while he was still only a Serene
tests/les_miserables.txt:41958:Highness, but a frank bourgeois from the day he became king; diffuse in
tests/les_miserables.txt:41959:public, concise in private; reputed, but not proved to be a miser; at
tests/les_miserables.txt:41960:bottom, one of those economists who are readily prodigal at their own
tests/les_miserables.txt:41961:fancy or duty; lettered, but not very sensitive to letters; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41962:gentleman, but not a chevalier; simple, calm, and strong; adored by his
tests/les_miserables.txt:41963:family and his household; a fascinating talker, an undeceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:41964:statesman, inwardly cold, dominated by immediate interest, always
tests/les_miserables.txt:41965:governing at the shortest range, incapable of rancor and of gratitude,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41966:making use without mercy of superiority on mediocrity, clever in
tests/les_miserables.txt:41968:unanimities which mutter dully under thrones; unreserved, sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:41969:imprudent in his lack of reserve, but with marvellous address in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:41970:imprudence; fertile in expedients, in countenances, in masks; making
tests/les_miserables.txt:41971:France fear Europe and Europe France! Incontestably fond of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:41972:country, but preferring his family; assuming more domination than
tests/les_miserables.txt:41973:authority and more authority than dignity, a disposition which has this
tests/les_miserables.txt:41974:unfortunate property, that as it turns everything to success, it admits
tests/les_miserables.txt:41975:of ruse and does not absolutely repudiate baseness, but which has this
tests/les_miserables.txt:41976:valuable side, that it preserves politics from violent shocks, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41977:state from fractures, and society from catastrophes; minute, correct,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41978:vigilant, attentive, sagacious, indefatigable; contradicting himself at
tests/les_miserables.txt:41979:times and giving himself the lie; bold against Austria at Ancona,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41981:Pritchard; singing the Marseillaise with conviction, inaccessible to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41982:despondency, to lassitude, to the taste for the beautiful and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:41983:ideal, to daring generosity, to Utopia, to chimæras, to wrath, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:41985:general at Valmy; a soldier at Jemappes; attacked eight times by
tests/les_miserables.txt:41986:regicides and always smiling. Brave as a grenadier, courageous as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41987:thinker; uneasy only in the face of the chances of a European shaking
tests/les_miserables.txt:41988:up, and unfitted for great political adventures; always ready to risk
tests/les_miserables.txt:41989:his life, never his work; disguising his will in influence, in order
tests/les_miserables.txt:41990:that he might be obeyed as an intelligence rather than as a king;
tests/les_miserables.txt:41993:judge; prompt and penetrating good sense, practical wisdom, easy
tests/les_miserables.txt:41994:speech, prodigious memory; drawing incessantly on this memory, his only
tests/les_miserables.txt:41995:point of resemblance with Cæsar, Alexander, and Napoleon; knowing
tests/les_miserables.txt:41996:deeds, facts, details, dates, proper names, ignorant of tendencies,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41997:passions, the diverse geniuses of the crowd, the interior aspirations,
tests/les_miserables.txt:41998:the hidden and obscure uprisings of souls, in a word, all that can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:41999:designated as the invisible currents of consciences; accepted by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42000:surface, but little in accord with France lower down; extricating
tests/les_miserables.txt:42001:himself by dint of tact; governing too much and not enough; his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:42002:first minister; excellent at creating out of the pettiness of realities
tests/les_miserables.txt:42003:an obstacle to the immensity of ideas; mingling a genuine creative
tests/les_miserables.txt:42004:faculty of civilization, of order and organization, an indescribable
tests/les_miserables.txt:42005:spirit of proceedings and chicanery, the founder and lawyer of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42007:in short, a lofty and original figure, a prince who understood how to
tests/les_miserables.txt:42008:create authority in spite of the uneasiness of France, and power in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42009:spite of the jealousy of Europe. Louis Philippe will be classed among
tests/les_miserables.txt:42010:the eminent men of his century, and would be ranked among the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:42016:graceful; not always approved by the nation, he always was so by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42017:masses; he pleased. He had that gift of charming. He lacked majesty; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:42018:wore no crown, although a king, and no white hair, although an old man;
tests/les_miserables.txt:42020:mixture of the noble and the bourgeois which suited 1830; Louis
tests/les_miserables.txt:42021:Philippe was transition reigning; he had preserved the ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:42022:pronunciation and the ancient orthography which he placed at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42023:service of opinions modern; he loved Poland and Hungary, but he wrote
tests/les_miserables.txt:42024:_les Polonois_, and he pronounced _les Hongrais_. He wore the uniform
tests/les_miserables.txt:42028:He went a little to chapel, not at all to the chase, never to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42029:opera. Incorruptible by sacristans, by whippers-in, by ballet-dancers;
tests/les_miserables.txt:42033:something of a doctor; he bled a postilion who had tumbled from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:42034:horse; Louis Philippe no more went about without his lancet, than did
tests/les_miserables.txt:42035:Henri IV. without his poniard. The Royalists jeered at this ridiculous
tests/les_miserables.txt:42036:king, the first who had ever shed blood with the object of healing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42038:For the grievances against Louis Philippe, there is one deduction to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:42039:made; there is that which accuses royalty, that which accuses the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42040:reign, that which accuses the King; three columns which all give
tests/les_miserables.txt:42041:different totals. Democratic right confiscated, progress becomes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42042:matter of secondary interest, the protests of the street violently
tests/les_miserables.txt:42043:repressed, military execution of insurrections, the rising passed over
tests/les_miserables.txt:42044:by arms, the Rue Transnonain, the counsels of war, the absorption of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42045:the real country by the legal country, on half shares with three
tests/les_miserables.txt:42047:Belgium refused, Algeria too harshly conquered, and, as in the case of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42048:India by the English, with more barbarism than civilization, the breach
tests/les_miserables.txt:42049:of faith, to Abd-el-Kader, Blaye, Deutz bought, Pritchard paid,—these
tests/les_miserables.txt:42050:are the doings of the reign; the policy which was more domestic than
tests/les_miserables.txt:42053:As will be seen, the proper deduction having been made, the King’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:42054:charge is decreased.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42056:This is his great fault; he was modest in the name of France.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42058:Whence arises this fault?
tests/les_miserables.txt:42062:Louis Philippe was rather too much of a paternal king; that incubation
tests/les_miserables.txt:42063:of a family with the object of founding a dynasty is afraid of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42064:everything and does not like to be disturbed; hence excessive timidity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42065:which is displeasing to the people, who have the 14th of July in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:42066:civil and Austerlitz in their military tradition.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42068:Moreover, if we deduct the public duties which require to be fulfilled
tests/les_miserables.txt:42070:was deserved by the family. That domestic group was worthy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42072:Philippe’s daughters, Marie d’Orleans, placed the name of her race
tests/les_miserables.txt:42073:among artists, as Charles d’Orleans had placed it among poets. She made
tests/les_miserables.txt:42074:of her soul a marble which she named Jeanne d’Arc. Two of Louis
tests/les_miserables.txt:42075:Philippe’s daughters elicited from Metternich this eulogium: “They are
tests/les_miserables.txt:42076:young people such as are rarely seen, and princes such as are never
tests/les_miserables.txt:42083:To be Prince Equality, to bear in his own person the contradiction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42085:the revolutionary which becomes reassuring in governing power, therein
tests/les_miserables.txt:42087:complete adaptation of a man to an event; the one entered into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42088:other, and the incarnation took place. Louis Philippe is 1830 made man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42089:Moreover, he had in his favor that great recommendation to the throne,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42090:exile. He had been proscribed, a wanderer, poor. He had lived by his
tests/les_miserables.txt:42091:own labor. In Switzerland, this heir to the richest princely domains in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42092:France had sold an old horse in order to obtain bread. At Reichenau, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:42093:gave lessons in mathematics, while his sister Adelaide did wool work
tests/les_miserables.txt:42094:and sewed. These souvenirs connected with a king rendered the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42095:bourgeoisie enthusiastic. He had, with his own hands, demolished the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42096:iron cage of Mont-Saint-Michel, built by Louis XI., and used by Louis
tests/les_miserables.txt:42097:XV. He was the companion of Dumouriez, he was the friend of Lafayette;
tests/les_miserables.txt:42098:he had belonged to the Jacobins’ club; Mirabeau had slapped him on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42102:tyrant_. The blind clairvoyance of the Revolution, breaking royalty in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42103:the King and the King with royalty, did so almost without noticing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42104:man in the fierce crushing of the idea, the vast storm of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42105:Assembly-Tribunal, the public wrath interrogating, Capet not knowing
tests/les_miserables.txt:42106:what to reply, the alarming, stupefied vacillation by that royal head
tests/les_miserables.txt:42107:beneath that sombre breath, the relative innocence of all in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:42108:catastrophe, of those who condemned as well as of the man condemned,—he
tests/les_miserables.txt:42109:had looked on those things, he had contemplated that giddiness; he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:42110:seen the centuries appear before the bar of the Assembly-Convention; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:42112:responsible, the terrible culprit, the monarchy, rise through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42113:shadows; and there had lingered in his soul the respectful fear of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42114:these immense justices of the populace, which are almost as impersonal
tests/les_miserables.txt:42115:as the justice of God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42117:The trace left in him by the Revolution was prodigious. Its memory was
tests/les_miserables.txt:42119:in the presence of a witness whom we are not permitted to doubt, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:42120:rectified from memory the whole of the letter A in the alphabetical
tests/les_miserables.txt:42124:press was free, the tribune was free, conscience and speech were free.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42127:light. History will do justice to him for this loyalty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42129:Louis Philippe, like all historical men who have passed from the scene,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42130:is to-day put on his trial by the human conscience. His case is, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:42131:yet, only in the lower court.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42133:The hour when history speaks with its free and venerable accent, has
tests/les_miserables.txt:42134:not yet sounded for him; the moment has not come to pronounce a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42136:Louis Blanc has himself recently softened his first verdict; Louis
tests/les_miserables.txt:42137:Philippe was elected by those two _almosts_ which are called the 221
tests/les_miserables.txt:42139:and in any case, from the superior point of view where philosophy must
tests/les_miserables.txt:42140:place itself, we cannot judge him here, as the reader has seen above,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42141:except with certain reservations in the name of the absolute democratic
tests/les_miserables.txt:42142:principle; in the eyes of the absolute, outside these two rights, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42143:right of man in the first place, the right of the people in the second,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42144:all is usurpation; but what we can say, even at the present day, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:42146:whatever manner he is considered, Louis Philippe, taken in himself, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42148:antique language of ancient history, one of the best princes who ever
tests/les_miserables.txt:42154:gravest souvenirs, after a day of conflict with the whole diplomacy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42155:the continent, he returned at night to his apartments, and there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42157:a death sentence and passed the night in revising a criminal suit,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42158:considering it something to hold his own against Europe, but that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:42159:was a still greater matter to rescue a man from the executioner. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:42161:disputed the ground with the guillotine foot by foot against the crown
tests/les_miserables.txt:42162:attorneys, those _chatterers of the law_, as he called them. Sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:42163:the pile of sentences covered his table; he examined them all; it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:42164:anguish to him to abandon these miserable, condemned heads. One day, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:42165:said to the same witness to whom we have recently referred: “I won
tests/les_miserables.txt:42167:penalty was as good as abolished, and the erection of a scaffold was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42168:violence committed against the King. The Grève having disappeared with
tests/les_miserables.txt:42169:the elder branch, a bourgeois place of execution was instituted under
tests/les_miserables.txt:42170:the name of the Barrière-Saint-Jacques; “practical men” felt the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42171:necessity of a quasi-legitimate guillotine; and this was one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42172:victories of Casimir Périer, who represented the narrow sides of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42174:Louis Philippe annotated Beccaria with his own hand. After the Fieschi
tests/les_miserables.txt:42175:machine, he exclaimed: “What a pity that I was not wounded! Then I
tests/les_miserables.txt:42176:might have pardoned!” On another occasion, alluding to the resistance
tests/les_miserables.txt:42177:offered by his ministry, he wrote in connection with a political
tests/les_miserables.txt:42178:criminal, who is one of the most generous figures of our day: “His
tests/les_miserables.txt:42183:the man who is kindly almost takes precedence of the man who is great.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42187:present day, who knew that king, should come and testify in his favor
tests/les_miserables.txt:42190:dead man is sincere; one shade may console another shade; the sharing
tests/les_miserables.txt:42191:of the same shadows confers the right to praise it; it is not greatly
tests/les_miserables.txt:42202:At the moment when the drama which we are narrating is on the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42203:penetrating into the depths of one of the tragic clouds which envelop
tests/les_miserables.txt:42204:the beginning of Louis Philippe’s reign, it was necessary that there
tests/les_miserables.txt:42205:should be no equivoque, and it became requisite that this book should
tests/les_miserables.txt:42209:without violence, without any direct action on his part, by virtue of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42210:revolutionary change, evidently quite distinct from the real aim of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42211:Revolution, but in which he, the Duc d’Orléans, exercised no personal
tests/les_miserables.txt:42212:initiative. He had been born a Prince, and he believed himself to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:42213:been elected King. He had not served this mandate on himself; he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:42214:not taken it; it had been offered to him, and he had accepted it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:42215:convinced, wrongly, to be sure, but convinced nevertheless, that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42216:offer was in accordance with right and that the acceptance of it was in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42217:accordance with duty. Hence his possession was in good faith. Now, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:42218:say it in good conscience, Louis Philippe being in possession in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42219:perfect good faith, and the democracy being in good faith in its
tests/les_miserables.txt:42220:attack, the amount of terror discharged by the social conflicts weighs
tests/les_miserables.txt:42221:neither on the King nor on the democracy. A clash of principles
tests/les_miserables.txt:42222:resembles a clash of elements. The ocean defends the water, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42223:hurricane defends the air, the King defends Royalty, the democracy
tests/les_miserables.txt:42224:defends the people; the relative, which is the monarchy, resists the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42225:absolute, which is the republic; society bleeds in this conflict, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:42226:that which constitutes its suffering to-day will constitute its safety
tests/les_miserables.txt:42227:later on; and, in any case, those who combat are not to be blamed; one
tests/les_miserables.txt:42229:Colossus of Rhodes, on two shores at once, with one foot on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42230:republic, and one in Royalty; it is indivisible, and all on one side;
tests/les_miserables.txt:42231:but those who are in error are so sincerely; a blind man is no more a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42232:criminal than a Vendean is a ruffian. Let us, then, impute to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42233:fatality of things alone these formidable collisions. Whatever the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42237:Let us complete this exposition.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42242:Hardly installed, it was already everywhere conscious of vague
tests/les_miserables.txt:42243:movements of traction on the apparatus of July so recently laid, and so
tests/les_miserables.txt:42244:lacking in solidity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42246:Resistance was born on the morrow; perhaps even, it was born on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42247:preceding evening. From month to month the hostility increased, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42248:from being concealed it became patent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42250:The Revolution of July, which gained but little acceptance outside of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42251:France by kings, had been diversely interpreted in France, as we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:42254:God delivers over to men his visible will in events, an obscure text
tests/les_miserables.txt:42256:it; translations hasty, incorrect, full of errors, of gaps, and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42257:nonsense. Very few minds comprehend the divine language. The most
tests/les_miserables.txt:42258:sagacious, the calmest, the most profound, decipher slowly, and when
tests/les_miserables.txt:42259:they arrive with their text, the task has long been completed; there
tests/les_miserables.txt:42260:are already twenty translations on the public place. From each
tests/les_miserables.txt:42261:remaining springs a party, and from each misinterpretation a faction;
tests/les_miserables.txt:42262:and each party thinks that it alone has the true text, and each faction
tests/les_miserables.txt:42265:Power itself is often a faction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42267:There are, in revolutions, swimmers who go against the current; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:42270:For the old parties who clung to heredity by the grace of God, think
tests/les_miserables.txt:42273:who revolts is not the people; it is the king. Revolution is precisely
tests/les_miserables.txt:42274:the contrary of revolt. Every revolution, being a normal outcome,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42275:contains within itself its legitimacy, which false revolutionists
tests/les_miserables.txt:42276:sometimes dishonor, but which remains even when soiled, which survives
tests/les_miserables.txt:42279:Revolutions spring not from an accident, but from necessity. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:42280:revolution is a return from the fictitious to the real. It is because
tests/les_miserables.txt:42284:1830 with all the vehemence which arises from false reasoning. Errors
tests/les_miserables.txt:42285:make excellent projectiles. They strike it cleverly in its vulnerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:42286:spot, in default of a cuirass, in its lack of logic; they attacked this
tests/les_miserables.txt:42288:king?” Factions are blind men who aim correctly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42290:This cry was uttered equally by the republicans. But coming from them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42291:this cry was logical. What was blindness in the legitimists was
tests/les_miserables.txt:42292:clearness of vision in the democrats. 1830 had bankrupted the people.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42293:The enraged democracy reproached it with this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42295:Between the attack of the past and the attack of the future, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42297:loggerheads on the one hand with the monarchical centuries, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42301:had become a monarchy, 1830 was obliged to take precedence of all
tests/les_miserables.txt:42302:Europe. To keep the peace, was an increase of complication. A harmony
tests/les_miserables.txt:42303:established contrary to sense is often more onerous than a war. From
tests/les_miserables.txt:42304:this secret conflict, always muzzled, but always growling, was born
tests/les_miserables.txt:42305:armed peace, that ruinous expedient of civilization which in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42306:harness of the European cabinets is suspicious in itself. The Royalty
tests/les_miserables.txt:42307:of July reared up, in spite of the fact that it caught it in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42308:harness of European cabinets. Metternich would gladly have put it in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42309:kicking-straps. Pushed on in France by progress, it pushed on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42310:monarchies, those loiterers in Europe. After having been towed, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:42313:Meanwhile, within her, pauperism, the proletariat, salary, education,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42315:production, consumption, division, exchange, coin, credit, the rights
tests/les_miserables.txt:42316:of capital, the rights of labor,—all these questions were multiplied
tests/les_miserables.txt:42317:above society, a terrible slope.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42319:Outside of political parties properly so called, another movement
tests/les_miserables.txt:42320:became manifest. Philosophical fermentation replied to democratic
tests/les_miserables.txt:42321:fermentation. The elect felt troubled as well as the masses; in another
tests/les_miserables.txt:42322:manner, but quite as much.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42325:traversed by revolutionary currents, trembled under them with
tests/les_miserables.txt:42326:indescribably vague epileptic shocks. These dreamers, some isolated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42327:others united in families and almost in communion, turned over social
tests/les_miserables.txt:42328:questions in a pacific but profound manner; impassive miners, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:42329:tranquilly pushed their galleries into the depths of a volcano, hardly
tests/les_miserables.txt:42330:disturbed by the dull commotion and the furnaces of which they caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:42333:This tranquillity was not the least beautiful spectacle of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:42334:agitated epoch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42336:These men left to political parties the question of rights, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:42337:occupied themselves with the question of happiness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42339:The well-being of man, that was what they wanted to extract from
tests/les_miserables.txt:42340:society.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42342:They raised material questions, questions of agriculture, of industry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42343:of commerce, almost to the dignity of a religion. In civilization, such
tests/les_miserables.txt:42344:as it has formed itself, a little by the command of God, a great deal
tests/les_miserables.txt:42345:by the agency of man, interests combine, unite, and amalgamate in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42346:manner to form a veritable hard rock, in accordance with a dynamic law,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42347:patiently studied by economists, those geologists of politics. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:42349:all be designated by the generic title of socialists, endeavored to
tests/les_miserables.txt:42350:pierce that rock and to cause it to spout forth the living waters of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42351:human felicity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42353:From the question of the scaffold to the question of war, their works
tests/les_miserables.txt:42354:embraced everything. To the rights of man, as proclaimed by the French
tests/les_miserables.txt:42355:Revolution, they added the rights of woman and the rights of the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42358:here treat in a thorough manner, from the theoretical point of view,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42359:the questions raised by socialism. We confine ourselves to indicating
tests/les_miserables.txt:42362:All the problems that the socialists proposed to themselves, cosmogonic
tests/les_miserables.txt:42363:visions, reverie and mysticism being cast aside, can be reduced to two
tests/les_miserables.txt:42364:principal problems.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42366:First problem: To produce wealth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42368:Second problem: To share it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42370:The first problem contains the question of work.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42372:The second contains the question of salary.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42374:In the first problem the employment of forces is in question.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42376:In the second, the distribution of enjoyment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42378:From the proper employment of forces results public power.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42385:From these two things combined, the public power without, individual
tests/les_miserables.txt:42386:happiness within, results social prosperity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42388:Social prosperity means the man happy, the citizen free, the nation
tests/les_miserables.txt:42391:England solves the first of these two problems. She creates wealth
tests/les_miserables.txt:42392:admirably, she divides it badly. This solution which is complete on one
tests/les_miserables.txt:42393:side only leads her fatally to two extremes: monstrous opulence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42394:monstrous wretchedness. All enjoyments for some, all privations for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42395:rest, that is to say, for the people; privilege, exception, monopoly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42397:which sates public power or private misery, which sets the roots of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42398:State in the sufferings of the individual. A badly constituted grandeur
tests/les_miserables.txt:42399:in which are combined all the material elements and into which no moral
tests/les_miserables.txt:42402:Communism and agrarian law think that they solve the second problem.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42403:They are mistaken. Their division kills production. Equal partition
tests/les_miserables.txt:42404:abolishes emulation; and consequently labor. It is a partition made by
tests/les_miserables.txt:42405:the butcher, which kills that which it divides. It is therefore
tests/les_miserables.txt:42410:two problems must be combined and made but one.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42412:Solve only the first of the two problems; you will be Venice, you will
tests/les_miserables.txt:42413:be England. You will have, like Venice, an artificial power, or, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:42414:England, a material power; you will be the wicked rich man. You will
tests/les_miserables.txt:42415:die by an act of violence, as Venice died, or by bankruptcy, as England
tests/les_miserables.txt:42417:selfishness, all that does not represent for the human race either a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42420:It is well understood here, that by the words Venice, England, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:42421:designate not the peoples, but social structures; the oligarchies
tests/les_miserables.txt:42423:always have our respect and our sympathy. Venice, as a people, will
tests/les_miserables.txt:42424:live again; England, the aristocracy, will fall, but England, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42425:nation, is immortal. That said, we continue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42427:Solve the two problems, encourage the wealthy, and protect the poor,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42430:making his way against the man who has reached the goal, adjust,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42431:mathematically and fraternally, salary to labor, mingle gratuitous and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42432:compulsory education with the growth of childhood, and make of science
tests/les_miserables.txt:42435:property democratic, not by abolishing it, but by making it universal,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42436:so that every citizen, without exception, may be a proprietor, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:42438:produce wealth and how to distribute it, and you will have at once
tests/les_miserables.txt:42439:moral and material greatness; and you will be worthy to call yourself
tests/les_miserables.txt:42440:France.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42442:This is what socialism said outside and above a few sects which have
tests/les_miserables.txt:42443:gone astray; that is what it sought in facts, that is what it sketched
tests/les_miserables.txt:42446:Efforts worthy of admiration! Sacred attempts!
tests/les_miserables.txt:42448:These doctrines, these theories, these resistances, the unforeseen
tests/les_miserables.txt:42449:necessity for the statesman to take philosophers into account, confused
tests/les_miserables.txt:42450:evidences of which we catch a glimpse, a new system of politics to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:42451:created, which shall be in accord with the old world without too much
tests/les_miserables.txt:42452:disaccord with the new revolutionary ideal, a situation in which it
tests/les_miserables.txt:42453:became necessary to use Lafayette to defend Polignac, the intuition of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42454:progress transparent beneath the revolt, the chambers and streets, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42455:competitions to be brought into equilibrium around him, his faith in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42457:vague acceptance of a superior definitive right, his desire to remain
tests/les_miserables.txt:42458:of his race, his domestic spirit, his sincere respect for the people,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42459:his own honesty, preoccupied Louis Philippe almost painfully, and there
tests/les_miserables.txt:42460:were moments when strong and courageous as he was, he was overwhelmed
tests/les_miserables.txt:42461:by the difficulties of being a king.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42463:He felt under his feet a formidable disaggregation, which was not,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42464:nevertheless, a reduction to dust, France being more France than ever.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42466:Piles of shadows covered the horizon. A strange shade, gradually
tests/les_miserables.txt:42468:ideas; a shade which came from wraths and systems. Everything which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:42469:been hastily stifled was moving and fermenting. At times the conscience
tests/les_miserables.txt:42470:of the honest man resumed its breathing, so great was the discomfort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42471:that air in which sophisms were intermingled with truths. Spirits
tests/les_miserables.txt:42472:trembled in the social anxiety like leaves at the approach of a storm.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42473:The electric tension was such that at certain instants, the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:42474:comer, a stranger, brought light. Then the twilight obscurity closed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42476:formed as to the quantity of thunder contained by the cloud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42478:Twenty months had barely elapsed since the Revolution of July, the year
tests/les_miserables.txt:42479:1832 had opened with an aspect of something impending and threatening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42481:The distress of the people, the laborers without bread, the last Prince
tests/les_miserables.txt:42483:Paris did the Bourbons, Belgium offering herself to a French Prince and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42484:giving herself to an English Prince, the Russian hatred of Nicolas,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42486:Portugal, the earth quaking in Italy, Metternich extending his hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:42487:over Bologna, France treating Austria sharply at Ancona, at the North
tests/les_miserables.txt:42489:coffin, irritated glances watching France narrowly all over Europe,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42490:England, a suspected ally, ready to give a push to that which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:42491:tottering and to hurl herself on that which should fall, the peerage
tests/les_miserables.txt:42492:sheltering itself behind Beccaria to refuse four heads to the law, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42493:fleurs-de-lys erased from the King’s carriage, the cross torn from
tests/les_miserables.txt:42495:in indigence, Casimir Périer dead in the exhaustion of his power;
tests/les_miserables.txt:42496:political and social malady breaking out simultaneously in the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:42497:capitals of the kingdom, the one in the city of thought, the other in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42498:the city of toil; at Paris civil war, at Lyons servile war; in the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:42499:cities, the same glare of the furnace; a crater-like crimson on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42500:brow of the people; the South rendered fanatic, the West troubled, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42501:Duchesse de Berry in la Vendée, plots, conspiracies, risings, cholera,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42510:Towards the end of April, everything had become aggravated. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:42511:fermentation entered the boiling state. Ever since 1830, petty partial
tests/les_miserables.txt:42512:revolts had been going on here and there, which were quickly
tests/les_miserables.txt:42514:underlying conflagration. Something terrible was in preparation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42515:Glimpses could be caught of the features still indistinct and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42516:imperfectly lighted, of a possible revolution. France kept an eye on
tests/les_miserables.txt:42519:The Faubourg Saint-Antoine, which was in a dull glow, was beginning its
tests/les_miserables.txt:42528:The government was there purely and simply called in question. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:42529:people publicly discussed the _question of fighting or of keeping
tests/les_miserables.txt:42530:quiet_. There were back shops where workingmen were made to swear that
tests/les_miserables.txt:42531:they would hasten into the street at the first cry of alarm, and “that
tests/les_miserables.txt:42532:they would fight without counting the number of the enemy.” This
tests/les_miserables.txt:42533:engagement once entered into, a man seated in the corner of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42539:there scenes that were almost masonic were enacted. They made the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42540:initiated take oaths _to render service to himself as well as to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42544:government with contempt_, says a secret report of that time.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42546:Words like the following could be heard there:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:42550:of us, let each contribute ten sous, that will make one hundred and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42551:fifty francs with which to procure powder and shot.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:42556:twenty-five thousand men we can face them.” Another said: “I don’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:42557:sleep at night, because I make cartridges all night.” From time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:42558:time, men “of bourgeois appearance, and in good coats” came and “caused
tests/les_miserables.txt:42559:embarrassment,” and with the air of “command,” shook hands with _the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42561:minutes. Significant remarks were exchanged in a low tone: “The plot is
tests/les_miserables.txt:42564:exaltation was such that one day, a workingman exclaimed, before the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42565:whole wine-shop: “We have no arms!” One of his comrades replied: “The
tests/les_miserables.txt:42566:soldiers have!” thus parodying without being aware of the fact,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42567:Bonaparte’s proclamation to the army in Italy: “When they had anything
tests/les_miserables.txt:42568:of a more secret nature on hand,” adds one report, “they did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:42569:communicate it to each other.” It is not easy to understand what they
tests/les_miserables.txt:42570:could conceal after what they said.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42572:These reunions were sometimes periodical. At certain ones of them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42575:was so full that they were forced to stand. Some went thither through
tests/les_miserables.txt:42576:enthusiasm and passion; others because it _was on their way to their
tests/les_miserables.txt:42577:work_. As during the Revolution, there were patriotic women in some of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42578:these wine-shops who embraced newcomers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42580:Other expressive facts came to light.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42583:“Wine-merchant, the revolution will pay what is due to you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:42586:Revolutionary agents were appointed in a wine-shop facing the Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:42587:Charonne. The balloting was carried on in their caps.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42589:Workingmen met at the house of a fencing-master who gave lessons in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42591:broadswords, canes, clubs, and foils. One day, the buttons were removed
tests/les_miserables.txt:42594:A workman said: “There are twenty-five of us, but they don’t count on
tests/les_miserables.txt:42595:me, because I am looked upon as a machine.” Later on, that machine
tests/les_miserables.txt:42596:became Quenisset.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42598:The indefinite things which were brewing gradually acquired a strange
tests/les_miserables.txt:42599:and indescribable notoriety. A woman sweeping off her doorsteps said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:42600:another woman: “For a long time, there has been a strong force busy
tests/les_miserables.txt:42601:making cartridges.” In the open street, proclamation could be seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:42603:proclamations was signed: _Burtot, wine-merchant_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42605:One day a man with his beard worn like a collar and with an Italian
tests/les_miserables.txt:42606:accent mounted a stone post at the door of a liquor-seller in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42607:Marché Lenoir, and read aloud a singular document, which seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:42608:emanate from an occult power. Groups formed around him, and applauded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42610:The passages which touched the crowd most deeply were collected and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42611:noted down. “—Our doctrines are trammelled, our proclamations torn, our
tests/les_miserables.txt:42612:bill-stickers are spied upon and thrown into prison.”—“The breakdown
tests/les_miserables.txt:42613:which has recently taken place in cottons has converted to us many
tests/les_miserables.txt:42614:mediums.”—“The future of nations is being worked out in our obscure
tests/les_miserables.txt:42615:ranks.”—“Here are the fixed terms: action or reaction, revolution or
tests/les_miserables.txt:42616:counter-revolution. For, at our epoch, we no longer believe either in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42618:the question. There is no other.”—“On the day when we cease to suit
tests/les_miserables.txt:42619:you, break us, but up to that day, help us to march on.” All this in
tests/les_miserables.txt:42622:Other deeds, more audacious still, were suspicious in the eyes of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42623:people by reason of their very audacity. On the 4th of April, 1832, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42624:passer-by mounted the post on the corner which forms the angle of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42626:Babeuf, the people scented Gisquet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42630:“Down with property! The opposition of the left is cowardly and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42631:treacherous. When it wants to be on the right side, it preaches
tests/les_miserables.txt:42632:revolution, it is democratic in order to escape being beaten, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42633:royalist so that it may not have to fight. The republicans are beasts
tests/les_miserables.txt:42634:with feathers. Distrust the republicans, citizens of the laboring
tests/les_miserables.txt:42635:classes.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:42638:“Silence, citizen spy!” cried an artisan.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42640:This shout put an end to the discourse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42642:Mysterious incidents occurred.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42644:At nightfall, a workingman encountered near the canal a “very well
tests/les_miserables.txt:42645:dressed man,” who said to him: “Whither are you bound, citizen?” “Sir,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:42646:replied the workingman, “I have not the honor of your acquaintance.” “I
tests/les_miserables.txt:42648:am an agent of the committee. You are suspected of not being quite
tests/les_miserables.txt:42654:The police, who were on the alert, collected singular dialogues, not
tests/les_miserables.txt:42657:“Get yourself received very soon,” said a weaver to a cabinet-maker.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42665:Two ragged pedestrians exchanged these remarkable replies, fraught with
tests/les_miserables.txt:42666:evident Jacquerie:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:42677:The reader is mistaken if he thinks that we take the word _Jacquerie_
tests/les_miserables.txt:42678:in a bad sense. The Jacques were the poor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42680:On another occasion two men were heard to say to each other as they
tests/les_miserables.txt:42681:passed by: “We have a good plan of attack.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:42684:Only the following was caught of a private conversation between four
tests/les_miserables.txt:42685:men who were crouching in a ditch of the circle of the Barrière du
tests/les_miserables.txt:42692:Who was the _he?_ Menacing obscurity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42694:“The principal leaders,” as they said in the faubourg, held themselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:42695:apart. It was supposed that they met for consultation in a wine-shop
tests/les_miserables.txt:42696:near the point Saint-Eustache. A certain Aug—, chief of the Society aid
tests/les_miserables.txt:42698:intermediary central between the leaders and the Faubourg
tests/les_miserables.txt:42702:leaders, and no certain fact can invalidate the singular arrogance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42703:this reply made later on by a man accused before the Court of Peers:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:42708:_“I knew of none and I recognized none.”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:42711:reports, rumors, hearsay. Other indications cropped up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42713:A carpenter, occupied in nailing boards to a fence around the ground on
tests/les_miserables.txt:42714:which a house was in process of construction, in the Rue de Reuilly
tests/les_miserables.txt:42715:found on that plot the torn fragment of a letter on which were still
tests/les_miserables.txt:42718:The committee must take measures to prevent recruiting in the sections
tests/les_miserables.txt:42719:for the different societies.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42721:And, as a postscript:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:42725:thousand, in the house of a gunsmith in that court. The section owns no
tests/les_miserables.txt:42728:What excited the carpenter and caused him to show this thing to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:42729:neighbors was the fact, that a few paces further on he picked up
tests/les_miserables.txt:42730:another paper, torn like the first, and still more significant, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42731:which we reproduce a facsimile, because of the historical interest
tests/les_miserables.txt:42732:attaching to these strange documents:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:42743:It was only later on that the persons who were in the secret of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:42744:find at the time, learned the significance of those four capital
tests/les_miserables.txt:42745:letters: _quinturions, centurions, decurions, éclaireurs_ [scouts], and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42746:the sense of the letters: _u og a’ fe_, which was a date, and meant
tests/les_miserables.txt:42747:April 15th, 1832. Under each capital letter were inscribed names
tests/les_miserables.txt:42748:followed by very characteristic notes. Thus: Q. _Bannerel_. 8 guns, 83
tests/les_miserables.txt:42749:cartridges. A safe man.—C. _Boubière_. 1 pistol, 40 cartridges.—D.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42751:cartridge-box. Exact.— _Terreur_. 8 guns. Brave, etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42753:Finally, this carpenter found, still in the same enclosure, a third
tests/les_miserables.txt:42754:paper on which was written in pencil, but very legibly, this sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42755:enigmatical list:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:42757:Unité:  Blanchard: Arbre-Sec. 6.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42759:Kosciusko. Aubry the Butcher?
tests/les_miserables.txt:42761:Caius Gracchus.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42763:Fall of the Girondists.  Derbac.  Maubuée.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42764:Washington.  Pinson.  1 pistol, 86 cartridges.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42766:Sovereignty of the people. Michel. Quincampoix. Sword.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42767:Hoche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42768:Marceau.  Plato.  Arbre-Sec.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42769:Warsaw.  Tilly, crier of the Populaire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42773:significance. It appears that this list was the complete nomenclature
tests/les_miserables.txt:42774:of the sections of the fourth arondissement of the Society of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42775:Rights of Man, with the names and dwellings of the chiefs of sections.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42776:To-day, when all these facts which were obscure are nothing more than
tests/les_miserables.txt:42778:of the Society of the Rights of Man seems to have been posterior to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42781:Still, according to all the remarks and the words, according to written
tests/les_miserables.txt:42782:notes, material facts begin to make their appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42784:In the Rue Popincourt, in the house of a dealer in bric-à-brac, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:42786:in four; these sheets enclosed twenty-six squares of this same gray
tests/les_miserables.txt:42787:paper folded in the form of a cartridge, and a card, on which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:42790:Saltpetre . . . . . . . . . . .  12 ounces.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42791:Sulphur   . . . . . . . . . . .   2 ounces.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42792:Charcoal  . . . . . . . . . . .   2 ounces and a half.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42793:Water     . . . . . . . . . . .   2 ounces.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42799:A mason returning from his day’s work, left behind him a little package
tests/les_miserables.txt:42800:on a bench near the bridge of Austerlitz. This package was taken to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42801:police station. It was opened, and in it were found two printed
tests/les_miserables.txt:42803:together,” and a tin box full of cartridges.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42805:One artisan drinking with a comrade made the latter feel him to see how
tests/les_miserables.txt:42806:warm he was; the other man felt a pistol under his waistcoat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42808:In a ditch on the boulevard, between Père-Lachaise and the Barrière du
tests/les_miserables.txt:42809:Trône, at the most deserted spot, some children, while playing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42810:discovered beneath a mass of shavings and refuse bits of wood, a bag
tests/les_miserables.txt:42811:containing a bullet-mould, a wooden punch for the preparation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42812:cartridges, a wooden bowl, in which there were grains of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42813:hunting-powder, and a little cast-iron pot whose interior presented
tests/les_miserables.txt:42814:evident traces of melted lead.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42816:Police agents, making their way suddenly and unexpectedly at five
tests/les_miserables.txt:42817:o’clock in the morning, into the dwelling of a certain Pardon, who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:42818:afterwards a member of the Barricade-Merry section and got himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:42819:killed in the insurrection of April, 1834, found him standing near his
tests/les_miserables.txt:42820:bed, and holding in his hand some cartridges which he was in the act of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42824:between the Barrière Picpus and the Barrière Charenton in a little lane
tests/les_miserables.txt:42825:between two walls, near a wine-shop, in front of which there was a “Jeu
tests/les_miserables.txt:42827:the other. As he was handing it to him, he noticed that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42828:perspiration of his chest had made the powder damp. He primed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42832:A certain Gallais, afterwards killed in the Rue Beaubourg in the affair
tests/les_miserables.txt:42833:of April, boasted of having in his house seven hundred cartridges and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42836:The government one day received a warning that arms and two hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:42837:thousand cartridges had just been distributed in the faubourg. On the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42838:following week thirty thousand cartridges were distributed. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:42839:remarkable point about it was, that the police were not able to seize a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42842:An intercepted letter read: “The day is not far distant when, within
tests/les_miserables.txt:42843:four hours by the clock, eighty thousand patriots will be under arms.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:42846:All this fermentation was public, one might almost say tranquil. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:42847:approaching insurrection was preparing its storm calmly in the face of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42848:the government. No singularity was lacking to this still subterranean
tests/les_miserables.txt:42849:crisis, which was already perceptible. The bourgeois talked peaceably
tests/les_miserables.txt:42850:to the working-classes of what was in preparation. They said: “How is
tests/les_miserables.txt:42851:the rising coming along?” in the same tone in which they would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:42856:going to make the attack?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:42861:“The attack will be made soon.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:42866:small pistol which he was willing to sell for seven francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42869:in France was exempt from it. The artery was beating everywhere. Like
tests/les_miserables.txt:42870:those membranes which arise from certain inflammations and form in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42871:human body, the network of secret societies began to spread all over
tests/les_miserables.txt:42872:the country. From the associations of the Friends of the People, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:42873:was at the same time public and secret, sprang the Society of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42874:Rights of Man, which also dated from one of the orders of the day:
tests/les_miserables.txt:42875:_Pluviôse, Year 40 of the republican era_, which was destined to
tests/les_miserables.txt:42876:survive even the mandate of the Court of Assizes which pronounced its
tests/les_miserables.txt:42877:dissolution, and which did not hesitate to bestow on its sections
tests/les_miserables.txt:42878:significant names like the following:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:42881:Tocsin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42882:Signal cannon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42883:Phrygian cap.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42887:Forward march.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42893:The Society of the Rights of Man engendered the Society of Action.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42895:Other associations sought to recruit themselves from the great mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:42896:societies. The members of sections complained that they were torn
tests/les_miserables.txt:42897:asunder. Thus, the Gallic Society, and the committee of organization of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42898:the Municipalities. Thus the associations for the liberty of the press,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42899:for individual liberty, for the instruction of the people against
tests/les_miserables.txt:42900:indirect taxes. Then the Society of Equal Workingmen which was divided
tests/les_miserables.txt:42901:into three fractions, the levellers, the communists, the reformers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42902:Then the Army of the Bastilles, a sort of cohort organized on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42903:military footing, four men commanded by a corporal, ten by a sergeant,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42905:more than five men who knew each other. Creation where precaution is
tests/les_miserables.txt:42906:combined with audacity and which seemed stamped with the genius of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42907:Venice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42909:The central committee, which was at the head, had two arms, the Society
tests/les_miserables.txt:42910:of Action, and the Army of the Bastilles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42912:A legitimist association, the Chevaliers of Fidelity, stirred about
tests/les_miserables.txt:42913:among these the republican affiliations. It was denounced and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42916:The Parisian societies had ramifications in the principal cities,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42917:Lyons, Nantes, Lille, Marseilles, and each had its Society of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42919:revolutionary society which was called the Cougourde. We have already
tests/les_miserables.txt:42922:In Paris, the Faubourg Saint-Marceau kept up an equal buzzing with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42923:Faubourg Saint-Antoine, and the schools were no less moved than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42924:faubourgs. A café in the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe and the wine-shop of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42925:_Seven Billiards_, Rue des Mathurins-Saint-Jacques, served as rallying
tests/les_miserables.txt:42926:points for the students. The Society of the Friends of the A B C
tests/les_miserables.txt:42930:the Rue Mondétour which was called Corinthe. These meetings were
tests/les_miserables.txt:42931:secret. Others were as public as possible, and the reader can judge of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42933:one of the ulterior prosecutions: “Where was this meeting held?” “In
tests/les_miserables.txt:42934:the Rue de la Paix.” “At whose house?” “In the street.” “What sections
tests/les_miserables.txt:42935:were there?” “Only one.” “Which?” “The Manuel section.” “Who was its
tests/les_miserables.txt:42936:leader?” “I.” “You are too young to have decided alone upon the bold
tests/les_miserables.txt:42937:course of attacking the government. Where did your instructions come
tests/les_miserables.txt:42938:from?” “From the central committee.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:42943:counted on the fifty-second regiment, on the fifth, on the eighth, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:42944:the thirty-seventh, and on the twentieth light cavalry. In Burgundy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:42946:pole surmounted by a red cap.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42948:Such was the situation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42951:population, as we stated in the beginning, accentuated this situation
tests/les_miserables.txt:42953:like an ant-hill, laborious, courageous, and angry as a hive of bees,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42954:was quivering with expectation and with the desire for a tumult.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42956:however, of the regular work. It is impossible to convey an idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42958:distress hidden under attic roofs; there also exist rare and ardent
tests/les_miserables.txt:42959:minds. It is particularly in the matter of distress and intelligence
tests/les_miserables.txt:42962:The Faubourg Saint-Antoine had also other causes to tremble; for it
tests/les_miserables.txt:42963:received the counter-shock of commercial crises, of failures, strikes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:42964:slack seasons, all inherent to great political disturbances. In times
tests/les_miserables.txt:42965:of revolution misery is both cause and effect. The blow which it deals
tests/les_miserables.txt:42966:rebounds upon it. This population full of proud virtue, capable to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:42969:fall of a spark. Whenever certain sparks float on the horizon chased by
tests/les_miserables.txt:42971:Saint-Antoine and of the formidable chance which has placed at the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:42974:The wine-shops of the _Faubourg Antoine_, which have been more than
tests/les_miserables.txt:42975:once drawn in the sketches which the reader has just perused, possess
tests/les_miserables.txt:42976:historical notoriety. In troublous times people grow intoxicated there
tests/les_miserables.txt:42977:more on words than on wine. A sort of prophetic spirit and an afflatus
tests/les_miserables.txt:42978:of the future circulates there, swelling hearts and enlarging souls.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42979:The cabarets of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine resemble those taverns of
tests/les_miserables.txt:42980:Mont Aventine erected on the cave of the Sibyl and communicating with
tests/les_miserables.txt:42981:the profound and sacred breath; taverns where the tables were almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:42982:tripods, and where was drunk what Ennius calls the _sibylline wine_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42985:agitations create fissures there, through which trickles the popular
tests/les_miserables.txt:42986:sovereignty. This sovereignty may do evil; it can be mistaken like any
tests/les_miserables.txt:42988:of the blind cyclops, _Ingens_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42990:In ’93, according as the idea which was floating about was good or
tests/les_miserables.txt:42991:evil, according as it was the day of fanaticism or of enthusiasm, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:42993:heroic bands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:42996:early days of the revolutionary chaos, tattered, howling, wild, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:42997:uplifted bludgeon, pike on high, hurled themselves upon ancient Paris
tests/les_miserables.txt:42999:end to tyranny, an end to the sword, work for men, instruction for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43000:child, social sweetness for the woman, liberty, equality, fraternity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43002:and that holy, sweet, and good thing, progress, they claimed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:43003:terrible wise, driven to extremities as they were, half naked, club in
tests/les_miserables.txt:43005:of civilization.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43007:They proclaimed right furiously; they were desirous, if only with fear
tests/les_miserables.txt:43008:and trembling, to force the human race to paradise. They seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:43012:Facing these men, who were ferocious, we admit, and terrifying, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:43013:ferocious and terrifying for good ends, there are other men, smiling,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43014:embroidered, gilded, beribboned, starred, in silk stockings, in white
tests/les_miserables.txt:43016:a velvet table, beside a marble chimney-piece, insist gently on
tests/les_miserables.txt:43018:divine right, of fanaticism, of innocence, of slavery, of the death
tests/les_miserables.txt:43020:sword, the stake, and the scaffold. For our part, if we were forced to
tests/les_miserables.txt:43021:make a choice between the barbarians of civilization and the civilized
tests/les_miserables.txt:43022:men of barbarism, we should choose the barbarians.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43024:But, thank Heaven, still another choice is possible. No perpendicular
tests/les_miserables.txt:43025:fall is necessary, in front any more than in the rear.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43030:God takes care of that. God’s whole policy consists in rendering slopes
tests/les_miserables.txt:43039:It was about this epoch that Enjolras, in view of a possible
tests/les_miserables.txt:43040:catastrophe, instituted a kind of mysterious census.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43042:All were present at a secret meeting at the Café Musain.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43044:Enjolras said, mixing his words with a few half-enigmatical but
tests/les_miserables.txt:43045:significant metaphors:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:43048:count. If combatants are required, they must be provided. It can do no
tests/les_miserables.txt:43049:harm to have something with which to strike. Passers-by always have
tests/les_miserables.txt:43050:more chance of being gored when there are bulls on the road than when
tests/les_miserables.txt:43051:there are none. Let us, therefore, reckon a little on the herd. How
tests/les_miserables.txt:43054:no time to lose. Let us mistrust the unexpected. Let us not be caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:43056:whether they hold fast. This business ought to be concluded to-day.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43057:Courfeyrac, you will see the polytechnic students. It is their day to
tests/les_miserables.txt:43059:Glacière, will you not? Combeferre has promised me to go to Picpus.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43060:There is a perfect swarm and an excellent one there. Bahorel will visit
tests/les_miserables.txt:43063:will go to Dupuytren’s clinical lecture, and feel the pulse of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43064:medical school. Bossuet will take a little turn in the court and talk
tests/les_miserables.txt:43065:with the young law licentiates. I will take charge of the Cougourde
tests/les_miserables.txt:43069:“That arranges everything,” said Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43080:“What is that?” asked Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43084:Enjolras remained for a moment as though absorbed in reflection, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:43088:journeymen in the studios of sculptors. They are an enthusiastic
tests/les_miserables.txt:43089:family, but liable to cool off. I don’t know what has been the matter
tests/les_miserables.txt:43091:are becoming extinguished. They pass their time playing dominoes. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:43093:with firmness. They meet at Richefeu’s. They are to be found there
tests/les_miserables.txt:43094:between twelve and one o’clock. Those ashes must be fanned into a glow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43095:For that errand I had counted on that abstracted Marius, who is a good
tests/les_miserables.txt:43096:fellow on the whole, but he no longer comes to us. I need some one for
tests/les_miserables.txt:43109:“You indoctrinate republicans! you warm up hearts that have grown cold
tests/les_miserables.txt:43110:in the name of principle!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43119:“I have a vague ambition in that direction,” said Grantaire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43127:“Grantaire will you do me a service?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43130:“Anything. I’ll black your boots.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43140:“You the man to go to the Barrière du Maine! You capable of it!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43143:“I am capable of descending the Rue de Grès, of crossing the Place
tests/les_miserables.txt:43144:Saint-Michel, of sloping through the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince, of taking
tests/les_miserables.txt:43146:Rue d’Assas, of reaching the Rue du Cherche-Midi, of leaving behind me
tests/les_miserables.txt:43147:the Conseil de Guerre, of pacing the Rue des Vieilles-Tuileries, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43148:striding across the boulevard, of following the Chaussée du Maine, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43149:passing the barrier, and entering Richefeu’s. I am capable of that. My
tests/les_miserables.txt:43150:shoes are capable of that.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43153:“Do you know anything of those comrades who meet at Richefeu’s?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43156:“Not much. We only address each other as _thou_.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43162:“I will speak to them of Robespierre, pardi! Of Danton. Of principles.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43168:“I. But I don’t receive justice. When I set about it, I am terrible. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:43169:have read Prudhomme, I know the Social Contract, I know my constitution
tests/les_miserables.txt:43170:of the year Two by heart. ‘The liberty of one citizen ends where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43171:liberty of another citizen begins.’ Do you take me for a brute? I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:43172:an old bank-bill of the Republic in my drawer. The Rights of Man, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43174:can talk the most superb twaddle for six hours by the clock, watch in
tests/les_miserables.txt:43185:“Grantaire,” he said gravely, “I consent to try you. You shall go to
tests/les_miserables.txt:43191:on a Robespierre waistcoat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43194:with the palm of his energetic hand, he laid the two scarlet points of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43195:the waistcoat across his breast.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43204:A quarter of an hour later, the back room of the Café Musain was
tests/les_miserables.txt:43205:deserted. All the friends of the A B C were gone, each in his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:43206:direction, each to his own task. Enjolras, who had reserved the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43210:plain of Issy, in one of the abandoned quarries which are so numerous
tests/les_miserables.txt:43213:As Enjolras walked towards this place, he passed the whole situation in
tests/les_miserables.txt:43215:facts, the premonitory symptoms of latent social malady, move heavily,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43216:the slightest complication stops and entangles them. A phenomenon
tests/les_miserables.txt:43217:whence arises ruin and new births. Enjolras descried a luminous
tests/les_miserables.txt:43220:right, and what a fine spectacle! The revolution was again majestically
tests/les_miserables.txt:43221:taking possession of France and saying to the world: “The sequel
tests/les_miserables.txt:43222:to-morrow!” Enjolras was content. The furnace was being heated. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:43223:at that moment a powder train of friends scattered all over Paris. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:43224:composed, in his own mind, with Combeferre’s philosophical and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43225:penetrating eloquence, Feuilly’s cosmopolitan enthusiasm, Courfeyrac’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:43226:dash, Bahorel’s smile, Jean Prouvaire’s melancholy, Joly’s science,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43227:Bossuet’s sarcasms, a sort of electric spark which took fire nearly
tests/les_miserables.txt:43228:everywhere at once. All hands to work. Surely, the result would answer
tests/les_miserables.txt:43232:out of my way. What if I were to go on as far as Richefeu’s? Let us
tests/les_miserables.txt:43236:One o’clock was striking from the Vaugirard steeple when Enjolras
tests/les_miserables.txt:43237:reached the Richefeu smoking-room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43243:A voice broke forth from the mist of smoke, interrupted by another
tests/les_miserables.txt:43244:voice. It was Grantaire holding a dialogue with an adversary.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43277:“Not much.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43297:“You weren’t expecting that double-six. If I had placed it at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43298:beginning, the whole play would have been changed.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43322:“What luck he has! Ah! You are lucky! [Long reverie.] Two.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43348:Marius had witnessed the unexpected termination of the ambush upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:43349:whose track he had set Javert; but Javert had no sooner quitted the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43350:building, bearing off his prisoners in three hackney-coaches, than
tests/les_miserables.txt:43351:Marius also glided out of the house. It was only nine o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43352:evening. Marius betook himself to Courfeyrac. Courfeyrac was no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:43354:in the Rue de la Verrerie “for political reasons”; this quarter was one
tests/les_miserables.txt:43355:where, at that epoch, insurrection liked to install itself. Marius said
tests/les_miserables.txt:43356:to Courfeyrac: “I have come to sleep with you.” Courfeyrac dragged a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43357:mattress off his bed, which was furnished with two, spread it out on
tests/les_miserables.txt:43361:At seven o’clock on the following morning, Marius returned to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43362:hovel, paid the quarter’s rent which he owed to Ma’am Bougon, had his
tests/les_miserables.txt:43363:books, his bed, his table, his commode, and his two chairs loaded on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43364:hand-cart and went off without leaving his address, so that when Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:43365:returned in the course of the morning, for the purpose of questioning
tests/les_miserables.txt:43366:Marius as to the events of the preceding evening, he found only Ma’am
tests/les_miserables.txt:43370:Ma’am Bougon was convinced that Marius was to some extent an accomplice
tests/les_miserables.txt:43372:have said it?” she exclaimed to the portresses of the quarter, “a young
tests/les_miserables.txt:43376:Marius had two reasons for this prompt change of residence. The first
tests/les_miserables.txt:43378:close at hand, and in its most repulsive and most ferocious
tests/les_miserables.txt:43379:development, a social deformity which is, perhaps, even more terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:43380:than the wicked rich man, the wicked poor man. The second was, that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:43381:did not wish to figure in the lawsuit which would insue in all
tests/les_miserables.txt:43387:without success.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43389:A month passed, then another. Marius was still with Courfeyrac. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:43390:learned from a young licentiate in law, an habitual frequenter of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43391:courts, that Thénardier was in close confinement. Every Monday, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:43392:had five francs handed in to the clerk’s office of La Force for
tests/les_miserables.txt:43395:As Marius had no longer any money, he borrowed the five francs from
tests/les_miserables.txt:43396:Courfeyrac. It was the first time in his life that he had ever borrowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:43397:money. These periodical five francs were a double riddle to Courfeyrac
tests/les_miserables.txt:43398:who lent and to Thénardier who received them. “To whom can they go?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43399:thought Courfeyrac. “Whence can this come to me?” Thénardier asked
tests/les_miserables.txt:43403:trap-door once more. He no longer saw anything before him; his life was
tests/les_miserables.txt:43405:moment beheld very close at hand, in that obscurity, the young girl
tests/les_miserables.txt:43410:certainty and truth had been emitted even in the most terrible of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43411:collisions. No conjecture was possible. He no longer knew even the name
tests/les_miserables.txt:43412:that he thought he knew. It certainly was not Ursule. And the Lark was
tests/les_miserables.txt:43413:a nickname. And what was he to think of the old man? Was he actually in
tests/les_miserables.txt:43414:hiding from the police? The white-haired workman whom Marius had
tests/les_miserables.txt:43415:encountered in the vicinity of the Invalides recurred to his mind. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:43416:now seemed probable that that workingman and M. Leblanc were one and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43417:the same person. So he disguised himself? That man had his heroic and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43418:his equivocal sides. Why had he not called for help? Why had he fled?
tests/les_miserables.txt:43420:the man whom Thénardier thought that he recognized? Thénardier might
tests/les_miserables.txt:43422:it is true, detracted nothing from the angelic charms of the young girl
tests/les_miserables.txt:43425:he could not stir. All had vanished, save love. Of love itself he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:43426:lost the instincts and the sudden illuminations. Ordinarily, this flame
tests/les_miserables.txt:43427:which burns us lights us also a little, and casts some useful gleams
tests/les_miserables.txt:43428:without. But Marius no longer even heard these mute counsels of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43429:passion. He never said to himself: “What if I were to go to such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43430:place? What if I were to try such and such a thing?” The girl whom he
tests/les_miserables.txt:43431:could no longer call Ursule was evidently somewhere; nothing warned
tests/les_miserables.txt:43432:Marius in what direction he should seek her. His whole life was now
tests/les_miserables.txt:43433:summed up in two words; absolute uncertainty within an impenetrable
tests/les_miserables.txt:43434:fog. To see her once again; he still aspired to this, but he no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:43435:expected it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43437:To crown all, his poverty had returned. He felt that icy breath close
tests/les_miserables.txt:43439:this, he had discontinued his work, and nothing is more dangerous than
tests/les_miserables.txt:43440:discontinued work; it is a habit which vanishes. A habit which is easy
tests/les_miserables.txt:43441:to get rid of, and difficult to take up again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43443:A certain amount of dreaming is good, like a narcotic in discreet
tests/les_miserables.txt:43444:doses. It lulls to sleep the fevers of the mind at labor, which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:43445:sometimes severe, and produces in the spirit a soft and fresh vapor
tests/les_miserables.txt:43446:which corrects the over-harsh contours of pure thought, fills in gaps
tests/les_miserables.txt:43448:But too much dreaming sinks and drowns. Woe to the brain-worker who
tests/les_miserables.txt:43450:that he can re-ascend with equal ease, and he tells himself that, after
tests/les_miserables.txt:43453:Thought is the toil of the intelligence, reverie its voluptuousness. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:43454:replace thought with reverie is to confound a poison with a food.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43457:supervened and had finished the work of precipitating him into chimæras
tests/les_miserables.txt:43458:without object or bottom. One no longer emerges from one’s self except
tests/les_miserables.txt:43459:for the purpose of going off to dream. Idle production. Tumultuous and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43460:stagnant gulf. And, in proportion as labor diminishes, needs increase.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43462:slack; the unstrung mind cannot hold life within close bounds.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43467:Resources are exhausted, needs crop up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43469:Fatal declivity down which the most honest and the firmest as well as
tests/les_miserables.txt:43470:the most feeble and most vicious are drawn, and which ends in one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43471:two holds, suicide or crime.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43473:By dint of going outdoors to think, the day comes when one goes out to
tests/les_miserables.txt:43476:Excess of reverie breeds men like Escousse and Lebras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43478:Marius was descending this declivity at a slow pace, with his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:43484:thought. He meditated of nothing else; he was confusedly conscious that
tests/les_miserables.txt:43485:his old coat was becoming an impossible coat, and that his new coat was
tests/les_miserables.txt:43488:could but see her once again before I die!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43492:glance had told him so, that she did not know his name, but that she
tests/les_miserables.txt:43494:place, she still loved him perhaps. Who knows whether she were not
tests/les_miserables.txt:43496:inexplicable hours such as are experienced by every heart that loves,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43498:obscure quiver of joy, he said to himself: “It is her thoughts that are
tests/les_miserables.txt:43499:coming to me!” Then he added: “Perhaps my thoughts reach her also.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43502:This illusion, at which he shook his head a moment later, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:43503:sufficient, nevertheless, to throw beams, which at times resembled
tests/les_miserables.txt:43504:hope, into his soul. From time to time, especially at that evening hour
tests/les_miserables.txt:43505:which is the most depressing to even the dreamy, he allowed the purest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43506:the most impersonal, the most ideal of the reveries which filled his
tests/les_miserables.txt:43507:brain, to fall upon a notebook which contained nothing else. He called
tests/les_miserables.txt:43512:contrary. He had lost the faculty of working and of moving firmly
tests/les_miserables.txt:43513:towards any fixed goal, but he was endowed with more clear-sightedness
tests/les_miserables.txt:43514:and rectitude than ever. Marius surveyed by a calm and real, although
tests/les_miserables.txt:43515:peculiar light, what passed before his eyes, even the most indifferent
tests/les_miserables.txt:43516:deeds and men; he pronounced a just criticism on everything with a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:43517:of honest dejection and candid disinterestedness. His judgment, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:43518:was almost wholly disassociated from hope, held itself aloof and soared
tests/les_miserables.txt:43521:In this state of mind nothing escaped him, nothing deceived him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43522:every moment he was discovering the foundation of life, of humanity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43528:The soul which loves and suffers is in a state of sublimity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43531:seemed to him, that the sombre space which still remained to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:43533:that he already distinctly perceived the brink of the bottomless abyss.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43539:When you have ascended the Rue Saint-Jacques, left the barrier on one
tests/les_miserables.txt:43540:side and followed the old inner boulevard for some distance, you reach
tests/les_miserables.txt:43541:the Rue de la Santé, then the Glacière, and, a little while before
tests/les_miserables.txt:43542:arriving at the little river of the Gobelins, you come to a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43543:field which is the only spot in the long and monotonous chain of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43546:There is something indescribable there which exhales grace, a green
tests/les_miserables.txt:43547:meadow traversed by tightly stretched lines, from which flutter rags
tests/les_miserables.txt:43549:time of Louis XIII., with its great roof oddly pierced with dormer
tests/les_miserables.txt:43551:women, voices, laughter; on the horizon the Panthéon, the pole of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43552:Deaf-Mutes, the Val-de-Grâce, black, squat, fantastic, amusing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43553:magnificent, and in the background, the severe square crests of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43556:As the place is worth looking at, no one goes thither. Hardly one cart
tests/les_miserables.txt:43559:It chanced that Marius’ solitary strolls led him to this plot of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43562:the place, asked this passer-by:—“What is the name of this spot?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43568:And he added: “It was here that Ulbach killed the shepherdess of Ivry.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43572:congealments in the state of reverie, which a single word suffices to
tests/les_miserables.txt:43573:evoke, do occur. The entire thought is abruptly condensed around an
tests/les_miserables.txt:43574:idea, and it is no longer capable of perceiving anything else.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43576:The Lark was the appellation which had replaced Ursule in the depths of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43577:Marius’ melancholy.—“Stop,” said he with a sort of unreasoning stupor
tests/les_miserables.txt:43578:peculiar to these mysterious asides, “this is her meadow. I shall know
tests/les_miserables.txt:43592:Javert’s triumph in the Gorbeau hovel seemed complete, but had not been
tests/les_miserables.txt:43595:In the first place, and this constituted the principal anxiety, Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:43597:more suspicious than the assassin, and it is probable that this
tests/les_miserables.txt:43598:personage, who had been so precious a capture for the ruffians, would
tests/les_miserables.txt:43601:And then, Montparnasse had escaped Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43604:waited for. Montparnasse had, in fact, encountered Éponine as she stood
tests/les_miserables.txt:43605:on the watch under the trees of the boulevard, and had led her off,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43606:preferring to play Nemorin with the daughter rather than Schinderhannes
tests/les_miserables.txt:43608:Éponine, Javert had caused her to be seized; a mediocre consolation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43611:And finally, on the way from the Gorbeau house to La Force, one of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43612:principal prisoners, Claquesous, had been lost. It was not known how
tests/les_miserables.txt:43613:this had been effected, the police agents and the sergeants “could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:43614:understand it at all.” He had converted himself into vapor, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:43615:slipped through the handcuffs, he had trickled through the crevices of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43616:the carriage, the fiacre was cracked, and he had fled; all that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:43618:Claquesous. Either the fairies or the police had had a hand in it. Had
tests/les_miserables.txt:43620:there been unavowed connivance of the police agents? Did this man
tests/les_miserables.txt:43621:belong to the double enigma of order and disorder? Was he concentric
tests/les_miserables.txt:43622:with infraction and repression? Had this sphinx his fore paws in crime
tests/les_miserables.txt:43623:and his hind paws in authority? Javert did not accept such
tests/les_miserables.txt:43624:comminations, and would have bristled up against such compromises; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:43625:his squad included other inspectors besides himself, who were more
tests/les_miserables.txt:43627:secrets of the Prefecture, and Claquesous had been such a villain that
tests/les_miserables.txt:43628:he might make a very good agent. It is an excellent thing for
tests/les_miserables.txt:43629:ruffianism and an admirable thing for the police to be on such intimate
tests/les_miserables.txt:43630:juggling terms with the night. These double-edged rascals do exist.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43634:As for Marius, “that booby of a lawyer,” who had probably become
tests/les_miserables.txt:43635:frightened, and whose name Javert had forgotten, Javert attached very
tests/les_miserables.txt:43636:little importance to him. Moreover, a lawyer can be hunted up at any
tests/les_miserables.txt:43642:the band of Patron Minette in close confinement, in the hope that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:43643:would chatter. This man was Brujon, the long-haired man of the Rue du
tests/les_miserables.txt:43644:Petit-Banquier. He had been let loose in the Charlemagne courtyard, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43645:the eyes of the watchers were fixed on him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43647:This name of Brujon is one of the souvenirs of La Force. In that
tests/les_miserables.txt:43648:hideous courtyard, called the court of the Bâtiment-Neuf (New
tests/les_miserables.txt:43649:Building), which the administration called the court Saint-Bernard, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43650:which the robbers called the Fosse-aux-Lions (The Lion’s Ditch), on
tests/les_miserables.txt:43651:that wall covered with scales and leprosy, which rose on the left to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43652:level with the roofs, near an old door of rusty iron which led to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43653:ancient chapel of the ducal residence of La Force, then turned in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43654:dormitory for ruffians, there could still be seen, twelve years ago, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43655:sort of fortress roughly carved in the stone with a nail, and beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:43662:The latter, of whom the reader caught but a glimpse at the Gorbeau
tests/les_miserables.txt:43663:house, was a very cunning and very adroit young spark, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43664:bewildered and plaintive air. It was in consequence of this plaintive
tests/les_miserables.txt:43666:the Charlemagne yard than in close confinement.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43668:Robbers do not interrupt their profession because they are in the hands
tests/les_miserables.txt:43669:of justice. They do not let themselves be put out by such a trifle as
tests/les_miserables.txt:43670:that. To be in prison for one crime is no reason for not beginning on
tests/les_miserables.txt:43671:another crime. They are artists, who have one picture in the salon, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43674:Brujon seemed to be stupefied by prison. He could sometimes be seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:43676:Charlemagne yard, staring like an idiot at the sordid list of prices
tests/les_miserables.txt:43677:which began with: _garlic_, 62 _centimes_, and ended with: _cigar_, 5
tests/les_miserables.txt:43678:_centimes_. Or he passed his time in trembling, chattering his teeth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43680:twenty beds in the fever ward was vacant.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43682:All at once, towards the end of February, 1832, it was discovered that
tests/les_miserables.txt:43683:Brujon, that somnolent fellow, had had three different commissions
tests/les_miserables.txt:43684:executed by the errand-men of the establishment, not under his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:43685:name, but in the name of three of his comrades; and they had cost him
tests/les_miserables.txt:43686:in all fifty sous, an exorbitant outlay which attracted the attention
tests/les_miserables.txt:43687:of the prison corporal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43689:Inquiries were instituted, and on consulting the tariff of commissions
tests/les_miserables.txt:43690:posted in the convict’s parlor, it was learned that the fifty sous
tests/les_miserables.txt:43691:could be analyzed as follows: three commissions; one to the Panthéon,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43692:ten sous; one to Val-de-Grâce, fifteen sous; and one to the Barrière de
tests/les_miserables.txt:43694:tariff. Now, at the Panthéon, at the Val-de-Grâce, and at the Barrière
tests/les_miserables.txt:43695:de Grenelle were situated the domiciles of the three very redoubtable
tests/les_miserables.txt:43697:ex-convict, and Barre-Carosse, upon whom the attention of the police
tests/les_miserables.txt:43698:was directed by this incident. It was thought that these men were
tests/les_miserables.txt:43700:had been captured. It was supposed that the messages, which had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:43702:the street, must have contained information with regard to some crime
tests/les_miserables.txt:43703:that had been plotted. They were in possession of other indications;
tests/les_miserables.txt:43705:circumvented some one or other of Brujon’s machinations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43708:superintendent of the watch, who had been inspecting the lower
tests/les_miserables.txt:43709:dormitory in the Bâtiment-Neuf, was about to drop his chestnut in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43710:box—this was the means adopted to make sure that the watchmen performed
tests/les_miserables.txt:43711:their duties punctually; every hour a chestnut must be dropped into all
tests/les_miserables.txt:43712:the boxes nailed to the doors of the dormitories—a watchman looked
tests/les_miserables.txt:43715:entered, Brujon was put in a solitary cell for a month, but they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:43716:not able to seize what he had written. The police learned nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:43719:What is certain is, that on the following morning, a “postilion” was
tests/les_miserables.txt:43720:flung from the Charlemagne yard into the Lions’ Ditch, over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43721:five-story building which separated the two court-yards.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43723:What prisoners call a “postilion” is a pallet of bread artistically
tests/les_miserables.txt:43724:moulded, which is sent _into Ireland_, that is to say, over the roofs
tests/les_miserables.txt:43725:of a prison, from one courtyard to another. Etymology: over England;
tests/les_miserables.txt:43727:the yard. The man who picks it up opens it and finds in it a note
tests/les_miserables.txt:43730:keeper, or one of the prisoners secretly sold who are called _sheep_ in
tests/les_miserables.txt:43731:prisons and _foxes_ in the galleys, the note is taken to the office and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43732:handed over to the police.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43734:On this occasion, the postilion reached its address, although the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43736:confinement. This person was no other than Babet, one of the four heads
tests/les_miserables.txt:43739:The postilion contained a roll of paper on which only these two lines
tests/les_miserables.txt:43747:In spite of male and female searchers, Babet managed to pass the note
tests/les_miserables.txt:43748:on from La Force to the Salpêtrière, to a “good friend” whom he had and
tests/les_miserables.txt:43750:another woman of her acquaintance, a certain Magnon, who was strongly
tests/les_miserables.txt:43751:suspected by the police, though not yet arrested. This Magnon, whose
tests/les_miserables.txt:43753:which will be described in detail later on, and she could, by going to
tests/les_miserables.txt:43757:It happened, that at precisely that moment, as proofs were wanting in
tests/les_miserables.txt:43758:the investigation directed against Thénardier in the matter of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:43759:daughters, Éponine and Azelma were released. When Éponine came out,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43760:Magnon, who was watching the gate of the Madelonettes, handed her
tests/les_miserables.txt:43761:Brujon’s note to Babet, charging her to look into the matter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43763:Éponine went to the Rue Plumet, recognized the gate and the garden,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43765:Magnon, who delivers in the Rue Clocheperce, a biscuit, which Magnon
tests/les_miserables.txt:43766:transmitted to Babet’s mistress in the Salpêtrière. A biscuit, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43770:the circle of La Force, the one on his way to the examination, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43776:“Biscuit,” replied Babet. Thus did the fœtus of crime engendered by
tests/les_miserables.txt:43777:Brujon in La Force miscarry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43779:This miscarriage had its consequences, however, which were perfectly
tests/les_miserables.txt:43780:distinct from Brujon’s programme. The reader will see what they were.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43791:Marius no longer went to see any one, but he sometimes encountered
tests/les_miserables.txt:43792:Father Mabeuf by chance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43794:While Marius was slowly descending those melancholy steps which may be
tests/les_miserables.txt:43795:called the cellar stairs, and which lead to places without light, where
tests/les_miserables.txt:43796:the happy can be heard walking overhead, M. Mabeuf was descending on
tests/les_miserables.txt:43800:indigo had not been successful in the little garden of Austerlitz,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43801:which had a bad exposure. M. Mabeuf could cultivate there only a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:43802:plants which love shade and dampness. Nevertheless, he did not become
tests/les_miserables.txt:43803:discouraged. He had obtained a corner in the Jardin des Plantes, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43805:this purpose he had pawned his copperplates of the _Flora_. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:43806:reduced his breakfast to two eggs, and he left one of these for his old
tests/les_miserables.txt:43809:infantile smile, he had grown morose and no longer received visitors.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43812:and the young man passed each other on the Boulevard de l’Hôpital. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:43813:did not speak, and only exchanged a melancholy sign of the head. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:43814:heart-breaking thing it is that there comes a moment when misery looses
tests/les_miserables.txt:43815:bonds! Two men who have been friends become two chance passers-by.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43818:garden, or his indigo: these were the three forms which happiness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43819:pleasure, and hope had assumed for him. This sufficed him for his
tests/les_miserables.txt:43821:blueing, I shall be rich, I will withdraw my copperplates from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43822:pawn-shop, I will put my _Flora_ in vogue again with trickery, plenty
tests/les_miserables.txt:43824:well where, a copy of Pierre de Médine’s _Art de Naviguer_, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:43825:wood-cuts, edition of 1655.” In the meantime, he toiled all day over
tests/les_miserables.txt:43827:and to read his books. At that epoch, M. Mabeuf was nearly eighty years
tests/les_miserables.txt:43833:Plutarque, whose health was declining, was ill and in bed. He had dined
tests/les_miserables.txt:43834:on a bone, on which a little meat lingered, and a bit of bread that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:43835:had found on the kitchen table, and had seated himself on an overturned
tests/les_miserables.txt:43836:stone post, which took the place of a bench in his garden.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43838:Near this bench there rose, after the fashion in orchard-gardens, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43839:sort of large chest, of beams and planks, much dilapidated, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43840:rabbit-hutch on the ground floor, a fruit-closet on the first. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:43841:was nothing in the hutch, but there were a few apples in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43842:fruit-closet,—the remains of the winter’s provision.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43845:his glasses, two books of which he was passionately fond and in which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:43847:rendered him accessible to the acceptance of superstitions in a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:43849:Delancre, _De l’Inconstance des Démons_; the other was a quarto by
tests/les_miserables.txt:43852:because his garden had been one of the spots haunted by goblins in
tests/les_miserables.txt:43854:blacken all below. As he read, over the top of the book which he held
tests/les_miserables.txt:43856:magnificent rhododendron which was one of his consolations; four days
tests/les_miserables.txt:43859:water, the rhododendron was particularly sad. Father Mabeuf was one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43862:laid his books on the bench, and walked, all bent over and with
tests/les_miserables.txt:43863:tottering footsteps, to the well, but when he had grasped the chain, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:43864:could not even draw it sufficiently to unhook it. Then he turned round
tests/les_miserables.txt:43865:and cast a glance of anguish toward heaven which was becoming studded
tests/les_miserables.txt:43868:The evening had that serenity which overwhelms the troubles of man
tests/les_miserables.txt:43869:beneath an indescribably mournful and eternal joy. The night promised
tests/les_miserables.txt:43872:“Stars everywhere!” thought the old man; “not the tiniest cloud! Not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43876:And his head, which had been upraised for a moment, fell back upon his
tests/les_miserables.txt:43879:He raised it again, and once more looked at the sky, murmuring:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:43884:He tried again to unhook the chain of the well, and could not.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43886:At that moment, he heard a voice saying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:43891:At the same time, a noise as of a wild animal passing became audible in
tests/les_miserables.txt:43894:him. She had less the air of a human being than of a form which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:43898:said, quick to take alarm, was able to reply by a single syllable, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:43900:had unhooked the chain, plunged in and withdrawn the bucket, and filled
tests/les_miserables.txt:43901:the watering-pot, and the goodman beheld this apparition, which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:43902:bare feet and a tattered petticoat, running about among the flower-beds
tests/les_miserables.txt:43904:leaves filled Father Mabeuf’s soul with ecstasy. It seemed to him that
tests/les_miserables.txt:43907:The first bucketful emptied, the girl drew a second, then a third. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:43911:her outline appeared perfectly black, waving her angular arms, and with
tests/les_miserables.txt:43912:her fichu all in rags, that resembled a bat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43914:When she had finished, Father Mabeuf approached her with tears in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:43917:“God will bless you,” said he, “you are an angel since you take care of
tests/les_miserables.txt:43924:The old man exclaimed, without either waiting for or hearing her
tests/les_miserables.txt:43927:“What a pity that I am so unhappy and so poor, and that I can do
tests/les_miserables.txt:43931:“You can do something,” said she.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43945:“A young man who used to come here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:43948:In the meantime, M. Mabeuf had searched his memory.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43950:“Ah! yes—” he exclaimed. “I know what you mean. Wait! Monsieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:43951:Marius—the Baron Marius Pontmercy, parbleu! He lives,—or rather, he no
tests/les_miserables.txt:43955:As he spoke, he had bent over to train a branch of rhododendron, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:43956:continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:43959:in the direction of the Glacière, Rue Croulebarbe. The meadow of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:43966:He was decidedly terrified.
tests/les_miserables.txt:43972:An hour later, when he was in bed, it came back to him, and as he fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:43973:asleep, at that confused moment when thought, like that fabulous bird
tests/les_miserables.txt:43974:which changes itself into a fish in order to cross the sea, little by
tests/les_miserables.txt:43990:hundred-sou piece from Courfeyrac for Thénardier—Marius had put this
tests/les_miserables.txt:43991:coin in his pocket, and before carrying it to the clerk’s office, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:43995:scribble some translation; his task at that epoch consisted in turning
tests/les_miserables.txt:43996:into French a celebrated quarrel between Germans, the Gans and Savigny
tests/les_miserables.txt:43997:controversy; he took Savigny, he took Gans, read four lines, tried to
tests/les_miserables.txt:43998:write one, could not, saw a star between him and his paper, and rose
tests/les_miserables.txt:43999:from his chair, saying: “I shall go out. That will put me in spirits.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44007:He returned home, tried to take up his work again, and did not succeed;
tests/les_miserables.txt:44008:there was no means of re-knotting a single one of the threads which
tests/les_miserables.txt:44012:He lived in the Lark’s meadow more than in Courfeyrac’s lodgings. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:44017:the parapet of the River des Gobelins. A cheerful sunlight penetrated
tests/les_miserables.txt:44020:He was dreaming of “Her.” And his meditation turning to a reproach,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44021:fell back upon himself; he reflected dolefully on his idleness, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:44022:paralysis of soul, which was gaining on him, and of that night which
tests/les_miserables.txt:44023:was growing more dense every moment before him, to such a point that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:44026:Nevertheless, athwart this painful extrication of indistinct ideas
tests/les_miserables.txt:44027:which was not even a monologue, so feeble had action become in him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44028:he had no longer the force to care to despair, athwart this melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:44029:absorption, sensations from without did reach him. He heard behind him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44031:Gobelins beating their linen, and above his head, the birds chattering
tests/les_miserables.txt:44033:the careless happiness of the leisure which has wings; on the other,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44034:the sound of toil. What caused him to meditate deeply, and almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:44035:reflect, were two cheerful sounds.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44037:All at once, in the midst of his dejected ecstasy, he heard a familiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:44038:voice saying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:44043:He raised his eyes, and recognized that wretched child who had come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44046:two steps which it had not seemed within her power to take. She had
tests/les_miserables.txt:44047:accomplished a double progress, towards the light and towards distress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44049:resolutely entered his chamber, only her rags were two months older
tests/les_miserables.txt:44051:harsh voice, the same brow dimmed and wrinkled with tan, the same free,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44052:wild, and vacillating glance. She had besides, more than formerly, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:44053:her face that indescribably terrified and lamentable something which
tests/les_miserables.txt:44054:sojourn in a prison adds to wretchedness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44057:having gone mad from the contagion of Hamlet’s madness, but because she
tests/les_miserables.txt:44063:In the meantime, she had halted in front of Marius with a trace of joy
tests/les_miserables.txt:44064:in her livid countenance, and something which resembled a smile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44066:She stood for several moments as though incapable of speech.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44072:had not reached years of discretion. I lack two months of it. Oh! how I
tests/les_miserables.txt:44079:“Ah! I understand. Because of that affair. Those take-downs are
tests/les_miserables.txt:44080:disagreeable. You cleared out. Come now! Why do you wear old hats like
tests/les_miserables.txt:44081:this! A young man like you ought to have fine clothes. Do you know,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44082:Monsieur Marius, Father Mabeuf calls you Baron Marius, I don’t know
tests/les_miserables.txt:44084:go to the Luxembourg, in front of the château, where there is the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:44085:sun, and they read the _Quotidienne_ for a sou. I once carried a letter
tests/les_miserables.txt:44096:She resumed with an expression which gradually clouded over:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:44101:Marius held his peace; she remained silent for a moment, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:44102:exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:44104:“But if I choose, nevertheless, I could force you to look glad!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44110:“Ah! you used to call me _thou_,” she retorted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44116:of inward conflict. At last she appeared to come to a decision.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44118:“So much the worse, I don’t care. You have a melancholy air, I want you
tests/les_miserables.txt:44132:Marius turned pale. All the blood flowed back to his heart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44152:Marius sprang from the parapet on which he had been sitting and seized
tests/les_miserables.txt:44153:her hand distractedly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44160:well; it is in quite the other direction from here, but I know the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44164:She withdrew her hand and went on, in a tone which could have rent the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44165:heart of an observer, but which did not even graze Marius in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:44166:intoxicated and ecstatic state:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:44171:A cloud swept across Marius’ brow. He seized Éponine by the arm:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:44195:“That’s nice! You have called me Éponine!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44198:Marius grasped both her arms at once.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44205:“My father!” said she. “Ah yes, my father! Be at ease. He’s in close
tests/les_miserables.txt:44206:confinement. Besides, what do I care for my father!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44209:“But you do not promise me!” exclaimed Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44234:“You are following me too closely, Monsieur Marius. Let me go on ahead,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44235:and follow me so, without seeming to do it. A nice young man like you
tests/les_miserables.txt:44239:No tongue can express all that lay in that word, _woman_, thus
tests/les_miserables.txt:44240:pronounced by that child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44242:She proceeded a dozen paces and then halted once more; Marius joined
tests/les_miserables.txt:44248:Marius fumbled in his pocket. All that he owned in the world was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44249:five francs intended for Thénardier the father. He took them and laid
tests/les_miserables.txt:44252:She opened her fingers and let the coin fall to the ground, and gazed
tests/les_miserables.txt:44268:About the middle of the last century, a chief justice in the Parliament
tests/les_miserables.txt:44269:of Paris having a mistress and concealing the fact, for at that period
tests/les_miserables.txt:44271:concealed them, had “a little house” built in the Faubourg
tests/les_miserables.txt:44272:Saint-Germain, in the deserted Rue Blomet, which is now called Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:44273:Plumet, not far from the spot which was then designated as _Combat des
tests/les_miserables.txt:44276:This house was composed of a single-storied pavilion; two rooms on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44277:ground floor, two chambers on the first floor, a kitchen downstairs, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44278:boudoir upstairs, an attic under the roof, the whole preceded by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44280:an acre and a half in extent. This was all that could be seen by
tests/les_miserables.txt:44281:passers-by; but behind the pavilion there was a narrow courtyard, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44282:at the end of the courtyard a low building consisting of two rooms and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44283:a cellar, a sort of preparation destined to conceal a child and nurse
tests/les_miserables.txt:44284:in case of need. This building communicated in the rear by a masked
tests/les_miserables.txt:44285:door which opened by a secret spring, with a long, narrow, paved
tests/les_miserables.txt:44286:winding corridor, open to the sky, hemmed in with two lofty walls,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44287:which, hidden with wonderful art, and lost as it were between garden
tests/les_miserables.txt:44288:enclosures and cultivated land, all of whose angles and detours it
tests/les_miserables.txt:44289:followed, ended in another door, also with a secret lock which opened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44293:Through this the chief justice entered, so that even those who were
tests/les_miserables.txt:44295:justice betook himself every day in a mysterious way somewhere, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44296:would never have suspected that to go to the Rue de Babylone was to go
tests/les_miserables.txt:44297:to the Rue Blomet. Thanks to clever purchasers of land, the magistrate
tests/les_miserables.txt:44298:had been able to make a secret, sewer-like passage on his own property,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44299:and consequently, without interference. Later on, he had sold in little
tests/les_miserables.txt:44300:parcels, for gardens and market gardens, the lots of ground adjoining
tests/les_miserables.txt:44301:the corridor, and the proprietors of these lots on both sides thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:44302:they had a party wall before their eyes, and did not even suspect the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44304:their orchards. Only the birds beheld this curiosity. It is probable
tests/les_miserables.txt:44305:that the linnets and tomtits of the last century gossiped a great deal
tests/les_miserables.txt:44306:about the chief justice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44308:The pavilion, built of stone in the taste of Mansard, wainscoted and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44309:furnished in the Watteau style, rocaille on the inside, old-fashioned
tests/les_miserables.txt:44311:discreet, coquettish, and solemn about it, as befits a caprice of love
tests/les_miserables.txt:44312:and magistracy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44314:This house and corridor, which have now disappeared, were in existence
tests/les_miserables.txt:44315:fifteen years ago. In ’93 a coppersmith had purchased the house with
tests/les_miserables.txt:44316:the idea of demolishing it, but had not been able to pay the price; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44317:nation made him bankrupt. So that it was the house which demolished the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44318:coppersmith. After that, the house remained uninhabited, and fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:44319:slowly to ruin, as does every dwelling to which the presence of man
tests/les_miserables.txt:44320:does not communicate life. It had remained fitted with its old
tests/les_miserables.txt:44322:who passed through the Rue Plumet were warned of the fact by a yellow
tests/les_miserables.txt:44323:and illegible bit of writing which had hung on the garden wall since
tests/les_miserables.txt:44327:noticed that the bill had disappeared, and even that the shutters on
tests/les_miserables.txt:44328:the first floor were open. The house was occupied, in fact. The windows
tests/les_miserables.txt:44329:had short curtains, a sign that there was a woman about.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44331:In the month of October, 1829, a man of a certain age had presented
tests/les_miserables.txt:44332:himself and had hired the house just as it stood, including, of course,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44333:the back building and the lane which ended in the Rue de Babylone. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:44334:had had the secret openings of the two doors to this passage repaired.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44336:with the justice’s old fitting; the new tenant had ordered some
tests/les_miserables.txt:44337:repairs, had added what was lacking here and there, had replaced the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44338:paving-stones in the yard, bricks in the floors, steps in the stairs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44339:missing bits in the inlaid floors and the glass in the lattice windows,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44341:elderly maid-servant, without commotion, rather like a person who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:44348:from the hospital and from wretchedness, and who was elderly, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44349:stammerer, and from the provinces, three qualities which had decided
tests/les_miserables.txt:44351:name of M. Fauchelevent, independent gentleman. In all that has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:44353:Thénardier to recognize Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44355:Why had Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Petit-Picpus? What had
tests/les_miserables.txt:44360:It will be remembered that Jean Valjean was happy in the convent, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:44361:happy that his conscience finally took the alarm. He saw Cosette every
tests/les_miserables.txt:44363:he brooded over the soul of that child, he said to himself that she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:44364:his, that nothing could take her from him, that this would last
tests/les_miserables.txt:44365:indefinitely, that she would certainly become a nun, being thereto
tests/les_miserables.txt:44366:gently incited every day, that thus the convent was henceforth the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44370:possible. On reflecting upon this, he fell into perplexity. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:44372:really his, if it were not composed of the happiness of another, of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44373:happiness of that child which he, an old man, was confiscating and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44374:stealing; if that were not theft? He said to himself, that this child
tests/les_miserables.txt:44375:had a right to know life before renouncing it, that to deprive her in
tests/les_miserables.txt:44376:advance, and in some sort without consulting her, of all joys, under
tests/les_miserables.txt:44378:ignorance of her isolation, in order to make an artificial vocation
tests/les_miserables.txt:44379:germinate in her, was to rob a human creature of its nature and to lie
tests/les_miserables.txt:44380:to God. And who knows if, when she came to be aware of all this some
tests/les_miserables.txt:44381:day, and found herself a nun to her sorrow, Cosette would not come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44382:hate him? A last, almost selfish thought, and less heroic than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44383:rest, but which was intolerable to him. He resolved to quit the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44384:convent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44386:He resolved on this; he recognized with anguish, the fact that it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:44387:necessary. As for objections, there were none. Five years’ sojourn
tests/les_miserables.txt:44388:between these four walls and of disappearance had necessarily destroyed
tests/les_miserables.txt:44389:or dispersed the elements of fear. He could return tranquilly among
tests/les_miserables.txt:44390:men. He had grown old, and all had undergone a change. Who would
tests/les_miserables.txt:44391:recognize him now? And then, to face the worst, there was danger only
tests/les_miserables.txt:44392:for himself, and he had no right to condemn Cosette to the cloister for
tests/les_miserables.txt:44393:the reason that he had been condemned to the galleys. Besides, what is
tests/les_miserables.txt:44394:danger in comparison with the right? Finally, nothing prevented his
tests/les_miserables.txt:44395:being prudent and taking his precautions.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44397:As for Cosette’s education, it was almost finished and complete.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44399:His determination once taken, he awaited an opportunity. It was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:44400:long in presenting itself. Old Fauchelevent died.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44402:Jean Valjean demanded an audience with the revered prioress and told
tests/les_miserables.txt:44403:her that, having come into a little inheritance at the death of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:44404:brother, which permitted him henceforth to live without working, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:44405:should leave the service of the convent and take his daughter with him;
tests/les_miserables.txt:44406:but that, as it was not just that Cosette, since she had not taken the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44407:vows, should have received her education gratuitously, he humbly begged
tests/les_miserables.txt:44408:the Reverend Prioress to see fit that he should offer to the community,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44409:as indemnity, for the five years which Cosette had spent there, the sum
tests/les_miserables.txt:44410:of five thousand francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44412:It was thus that Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Perpetual
tests/les_miserables.txt:44415:On leaving the convent, he took in his own arms the little valise the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44416:key to which he still wore on his person, and would permit no porter to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44417:touch it. This puzzled Cosette, because of the odor of embalming which
tests/les_miserables.txt:44418:proceeded from it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44420:Let us state at once, that this trunk never quitted him more. He always
tests/les_miserables.txt:44421:had it in his chamber. It was the first and only thing sometimes, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:44422:he carried off in his moving when he moved about. Cosette laughed at
tests/les_miserables.txt:44423:it, and called this valise his _inseparable_, saying: “I am jealous of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44430:He discovered the house in the Rue Plumet, and hid himself from sight
tests/les_miserables.txt:44431:there. Henceforth he was in the possession of the name:—Ultime
tests/les_miserables.txt:44432:Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44435:he might attract less attention than if he were to remain always in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44436:same quarter, and so that he could, at need, take himself off at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44437:slightest disquietude which should assail him, and in short, so that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:44438:might not again be caught unprovided as on the night when he had so
tests/les_miserables.txt:44439:miraculously escaped from Javert. These two apartments were very
tests/les_miserables.txt:44440:pitiable, poor in appearance, and in two quarters which were far remote
tests/les_miserables.txt:44441:from each other, the one in the Rue de l’Ouest, the other in the Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:44448:temporary resting-place in town. This lofty virtue had three domiciles
tests/les_miserables.txt:44449:in Paris for the sake of escaping from the police.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44458:arranged his existence there in the following fashion:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:44460:Cosette and the servant occupied the pavilion; she had the big
tests/les_miserables.txt:44462:gilded fillets, the justice’s drawing-room furnished with tapestries
tests/les_miserables.txt:44463:and vast armchairs; she had the garden. Jean Valjean had a canopied bed
tests/les_miserables.txt:44464:of antique damask in three colors and a beautiful Persian rug purchased
tests/les_miserables.txt:44465:in the Rue du Figuier-Saint-Paul at Mother Gaucher’s, put into
tests/les_miserables.txt:44466:Cosette’s chamber, and, in order to redeem the severity of these
tests/les_miserables.txt:44467:magnificent old things, he had amalgamated with this bric-à-brac all
tests/les_miserables.txt:44468:the gay and graceful little pieces of furniture suitable to young
tests/les_miserables.txt:44469:girls, an étagère, a bookcase filled with gilt-edged books, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:44470:inkstand, a blotting-book, paper, a work-table incrusted with mother of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44471:pearl, a silver-gilt dressing-case, a toilet service in Japanese
tests/les_miserables.txt:44472:porcelain. Long damask curtains with a red foundation and three colors,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44474:ground floor, the curtains were of tapestry. All winter long, Cosette’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:44476:sort of porter’s lodge which was situated at the end of the back
tests/les_miserables.txt:44477:courtyard, with a mattress on a folding-bed, a white wood table, two
tests/les_miserables.txt:44478:straw chairs, an earthenware water-jug, a few old volumes on a shelf,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44479:his beloved valise in one corner, and never any fire. He dined with
tests/les_miserables.txt:44480:Cosette, and he had a loaf of black bread on the table for his own use.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44482:When Toussaint came, he had said to her: “It is the young lady who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:44484:amazement.—“I am a much better thing than the master, I am the father.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44487:Cosette had been taught housekeeping in the convent, and she regulated
tests/les_miserables.txt:44488:their expenditure, which was very modest. Every day, Jean Valjean put
tests/les_miserables.txt:44491:to mass at Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, because that was a long way off.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44493:poor people surrounded him in church, which had drawn down upon him
tests/les_miserables.txt:44494:Thénardier’s epistle: “To the benevolent gentleman of the church of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44495:Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.” He was fond of taking Cosette to visit the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44496:poor and the sick. No stranger ever entered the house in the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:44499:wine were put into a half-subterranean hollow lined with rock-work
tests/les_miserables.txt:44500:which lay near the Rue de Babylone and which had formerly served the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44501:chief-justice as a grotto; for at the epoch of follies and “Little
tests/les_miserables.txt:44505:for the reception of letters and papers; only, as the three inhabitants
tests/les_miserables.txt:44506:of the pavilion in the Rue Plumet received neither papers nor letters,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44508:affair, and the confidant of a love-lorn lawyer, was now limited to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44509:tax-collector’s notices, and the summons of the guard. For M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44510:Fauchelevent, independent gentleman, belonged to the national guard; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:44511:had not been able to escape through the fine meshes of the census of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44512:1831. The municipal information collected at that time had even reached
tests/les_miserables.txt:44513:the convent of the Petit-Picpus, a sort of impenetrable and holy cloud,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44514:whence Jean Valjean had emerged in venerable guise, and, consequently,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44518:guard; he did this willingly, however; it was a correct disguise which
tests/les_miserables.txt:44521:did not appear to be over fifty; moreover, he had no desire to escape
tests/les_miserables.txt:44523:civil status, he was concealing his name, he was concealing his
tests/les_miserables.txt:44524:identity, so he concealed his age, he concealed everything; and, as we
tests/les_miserables.txt:44531:a retired officer. When he went out alone, which was generally at
tests/les_miserables.txt:44533:wore a cap which concealed his face. Was this precaution or humility?
tests/les_miserables.txt:44534:Both. Cosette was accustomed to the enigmatical side of her destiny,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44535:and hardly noticed her father’s peculiarities. As for Toussaint, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:44538:One day, her butcher, who had caught a glimpse of Jean Valjean, said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44543:except by the door on the Rue de Babylone. Unless seen through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44544:garden gate it would have been difficult to guess that they lived in
tests/les_miserables.txt:44545:the Rue Plumet. That gate was always closed. Jean Valjean had left the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44546:garden uncultivated, in order not to attract attention.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44556:The garden thus left to itself for more than half a century had become
tests/les_miserables.txt:44557:extraordinary and charming. The passers-by of forty years ago halted to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44558:gaze at it, without a suspicion of the secrets which it hid in its
tests/les_miserables.txt:44559:fresh and verdant depths. More than one dreamer of that epoch often
tests/les_miserables.txt:44560:allowed his thoughts and his eyes to penetrate indiscreetly between the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44561:bars of that ancient, padlocked gate, twisted, tottering, fastened to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44562:two green and moss-covered pillars, and oddly crowned with a pediment
tests/les_miserables.txt:44563:of undecipherable arabesque.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44565:There was a stone bench in one corner, one or two mouldy statues,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44566:several lattices which had lost their nails with time, were rotting on
tests/les_miserables.txt:44569:Weeds abounded, which was a great piece of luck for a poor corner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44571:this garden obstructed the sacred effort of things towards life;
tests/les_miserables.txt:44573:towards the nettles, the plant had sprung upward, the branch had
tests/les_miserables.txt:44574:inclined, that which crawls on the earth had gone in search of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:44575:which expands in the air, that which floats on the wind had bent over
tests/les_miserables.txt:44576:towards that which trails in the moss; trunks, boughs, leaves, fibres,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44577:clusters, tendrils, shoots, spines, thorns, had mingled, crossed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44578:married, confounded themselves in each other; vegetation in a deep and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44579:close embrace, had celebrated and accomplished there, under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44580:well-pleased eye of the Creator, in that enclosure three hundred feet
tests/les_miserables.txt:44582:This garden was no longer a garden, it was a colossal thicket, that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:44583:to say, something as impenetrable as a forest, as peopled as a city,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44584:quivering like a nest, sombre like a cathedral, fragrant like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44587:In Floréal34 this enormous thicket, free behind its gate and within its
tests/les_miserables.txt:44588:four walls, entered upon the secret labor of germination, quivered in
tests/les_miserables.txt:44589:the rising sun, almost like an animal which drinks in the breaths of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44590:cosmic love, and which feels the sap of April rising and boiling in its
tests/les_miserables.txt:44591:veins, and shakes to the wind its enormous wonderful green locks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44592:sprinkled on the damp earth, on the defaced statues, on the crumbling
tests/les_miserables.txt:44594:flowers like stars, dew like pearls, fecundity, beauty, life, joy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44596:and it was a divine spectacle to see that living summer snow whirling
tests/les_miserables.txt:44598:verdure, a throng of innocent voices spoke sweetly to the soul, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44599:what the twittering forgot to say the humming completed. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44601:shroud of mist, a calm and celestial sadness covered it; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44602:intoxicating perfume of the honeysuckles and convolvulus poured out
tests/les_miserables.txt:44604:appeals of the woodpeckers and the wagtails were audible as they dozed
tests/les_miserables.txt:44605:among the branches; one felt the sacred intimacy of the birds and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44606:trees; by day the wings rejoice the leaves, by night the leaves protect
tests/les_miserables.txt:44609:In winter the thicket was black, dripping, bristling, shivering, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44610:allowed some glimpse of the house. Instead of flowers on the branches
tests/les_miserables.txt:44611:and dew in the flowers, the long silvery tracks of the snails were
tests/les_miserables.txt:44612:visible on the cold, thick carpet of yellow leaves; but in any fashion,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44613:under any aspect, at all seasons, spring, winter, summer, autumn, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:44614:tiny enclosure breathed forth melancholy, contemplation, solitude,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44615:liberty, the absence of man, the presence of God; and the rusty old
tests/les_miserables.txt:44620:side, the classic and splendid hotels of the Rue de Varennes a couple
tests/les_miserables.txt:44621:of paces away, the dome of the Invalides close at hand, the Chamber of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44622:Deputies not far off; the carriages of the Rue de Bourgogne and of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44623:Rue Saint-Dominique rumbled luxuriously, in vain, in the vicinity, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:44624:vain did the yellow, brown, white, and red omnibuses cross each other’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:44625:course at the neighboring crossroads; the Rue Plumet was the desert;
tests/les_miserables.txt:44626:and the death of the former proprietors, the revolution which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:44627:passed over it, the crumbling away of ancient fortunes, absence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44628:forgetfulness, forty years of abandonment and widowhood, had sufficed
tests/les_miserables.txt:44629:to restore to this privileged spot ferns, mulleins, hemlock, yarrow,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44630:tall weeds, great crimped plants, with large leaves of pale green
tests/les_miserables.txt:44631:cloth, lizards, beetles, uneasy and rapid insects; to cause to spring
tests/les_miserables.txt:44633:walls a certain indescribable and savage grandeur; and for nature,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44634:which disconcerts the petty arrangements of man, and which sheds
tests/les_miserables.txt:44637:garden with as much rude force and majesty as in a virgin forest of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44640:Nothing is small, in fact; any one who is subject to the profound and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44641:penetrating influence of nature knows this. Although no absolute
tests/les_miserables.txt:44642:satisfaction is given to philosophy, either to circumscribe the cause
tests/les_miserables.txt:44643:or to limit the effect, the contemplator falls into those unfathomable
tests/les_miserables.txt:44644:ecstasies caused by these decompositions of force terminating in unity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44647:Algebra is applied to the clouds; the radiation of the star profits the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44649:hawthorn is useless to the constellations. Who, then, can calculate the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44650:course of a molecule? How do we know that the creation of worlds is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:44651:determined by the fall of grains of sand? Who knows the reciprocal ebb
tests/les_miserables.txt:44653:reverberations of causes in the precipices of being, and the avalanches
tests/les_miserables.txt:44654:of creation? The tiniest worm is of importance; the great is little,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44655:the little is great; everything is balanced in necessity; alarming
tests/les_miserables.txt:44658:despises the other; all have need of each other. The light does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:44660:what it is doing; the night distributes stellar essences to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44662:the infinite. Germination is complicated with the bursting forth of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44663:meteor and with the peck of a swallow cracking its egg, and it places
tests/les_miserables.txt:44664:on one level the birth of an earthworm and the advent of Socrates.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44665:Where the telescope ends, the microscope begins. Which of the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:44668:promiscuousness, and yet more unprecedented, exists between the things
tests/les_miserables.txt:44669:of the intelligence and the facts of substance. Elements and principles
tests/les_miserables.txt:44670:mingle, combine, wed, multiply with each other, to such a point that
tests/les_miserables.txt:44672:clearness. The phenomenon is perpetually returning upon itself. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44673:vast cosmic exchanges the universal life goes and comes in unknown
tests/les_miserables.txt:44676:sowing an animalcule here, crumbling to bits a planet there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44677:oscillating and winding, making of light a force and of thought an
tests/les_miserables.txt:44678:element, disseminated and invisible, dissolving all, except that
tests/les_miserables.txt:44679:geometrical point, the _I_; bringing everything back to the soul-atom;
tests/les_miserables.txt:44680:expanding everything in God, entangling all activity, from summit to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44681:base, in the obscurity of a dizzy mechanism, attaching the flight of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:44682:insect to the movement of the earth, subordinating, who knows? Were it
tests/les_miserables.txt:44683:only by the identity of the law, the evolution of the comet in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44685:machine made of mind. Enormous gearing, the prime motor of which is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44686:gnat, and whose final wheel is the zodiac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44694:It seemed that this garden, created in olden days to conceal wanton
tests/les_miserables.txt:44695:mysteries, had been transformed and become fitted to shelter chaste
tests/les_miserables.txt:44697:tunnels, or grottos; there was a magnificent, dishevelled obscurity
tests/les_miserables.txt:44699:is impossible to say what element of repentance had rendered this
tests/les_miserables.txt:44701:soul. This coquettish garden, formerly decidedly compromised, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:44702:returned to virginity and modesty. A justice assisted by a gardener, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44703:goodman who thought that he was a continuation of Lamoignon, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44704:another goodman who thought that he was a continuation of Lenôtre, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:44705:turned it about, cut, ruffled, decked, moulded it to gallantry; nature
tests/les_miserables.txt:44706:had taken possession of it once more, had filled it with shade, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:44709:There was, also, in this solitude, a heart which was quite ready. Love
tests/les_miserables.txt:44710:had only to show himself; he had here a temple composed of verdure,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44711:grass, moss, the sight of birds, tender shadows, agitated branches, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44712:a soul made of sweetness, of faith, of candor, of hope, of aspiration,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44715:Cosette had left the convent when she was still almost a child; she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:44717:have already said, that with the exception of her eyes, she was homely
tests/les_miserables.txt:44718:rather than pretty; she had no ungraceful feature, but she was awkward,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44719:thin, timid and bold at once, a grown-up little girl, in short.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44721:Her education was finished, that is to say, she has been taught
tests/les_miserables.txt:44723:say the thing that bears that name in convents, geography, grammar, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44724:participles, the kings of France, a little music, a little drawing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44725:etc.; but in all other respects she was utterly ignorant, which is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44726:great charm and a great peril. The soul of a young girl should not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:44728:are formed there, as in a dark chamber. She should be gently and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44729:discreetly enlightened, rather with the reflection of realities than
tests/les_miserables.txt:44730:with their harsh and direct light. A useful and graciously austere
tests/les_miserables.txt:44731:half-light which dissipates puerile fears and obviates falls. There is
tests/les_miserables.txt:44732:nothing but the maternal instinct, that admirable intuition composed of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44733:the memories of the virgin and the experience of the woman, which knows
tests/les_miserables.txt:44734:how this half-light is to be created and of what it should consist.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44736:Nothing supplies the place of this instinct. All the nuns in the world
tests/les_miserables.txt:44737:are not worth as much as one mother in the formation of a young girl’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:44743:As for Jean Valjean, he was, indeed, all tenderness, all solicitude;
tests/les_miserables.txt:44746:Now, in this work of education, in this grave matter of preparing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44747:woman for life, what science is required to combat that vast ignorance
tests/les_miserables.txt:44748:which is called innocence!
tests/les_miserables.txt:44750:Nothing prepares a young girl for passions like the convent. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:44751:convent turns the thoughts in the direction of the unknown. The heart,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44752:thus thrown back upon itself, works downward within itself, since it
tests/les_miserables.txt:44753:cannot overflow, and grows deep, since it cannot expand. Hence visions,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44754:suppositions, conjectures, outlines of romances, a desire for
tests/les_miserables.txt:44755:adventures, fantastic constructions, edifices built wholly in the inner
tests/les_miserables.txt:44756:obscurity of the mind, sombre and secret abodes where the passions
tests/les_miserables.txt:44758:enter. The convent is a compression which, in order to triumph over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44761:On quitting the convent, Cosette could have found nothing more sweet
tests/les_miserables.txt:44763:continuation of solitude with the beginning of liberty; a garden that
tests/les_miserables.txt:44764:was closed, but a nature that was acrid, rich, voluptuous, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44765:fragrant; the same dreams as in the convent, but with glimpses of young
tests/les_miserables.txt:44768:Still, when she arrived there, we repeat, she was only a child. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:44769:Valjean gave this neglected garden over to her. “Do what you like with
tests/les_miserables.txt:44771:clumps and all the stones, she hunted for “beasts”; she played in it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44773:garden for the insects that she found beneath her feet amid the grass,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44778:her soul, with an innocent filial passion which made the goodman a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44779:beloved and charming companion to her. It will be remembered that M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44781:had continued this practice; he had come to converse well; he possessed
tests/les_miserables.txt:44782:the secret riches and the eloquence of a true and humble mind which has
tests/les_miserables.txt:44783:spontaneously cultivated itself. He retained just enough sharpness to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44785:their conversations in the Luxembourg, he gave her explanations of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44790:This simple man sufficed for Cosette’s thought, the same as the wild
tests/les_miserables.txt:44791:garden sufficed for her eyes. When she had had a good chase after the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44792:butterflies, she came panting up to him and said: “Ah! How I have run!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44797:pavilion nor the garden; she took greater pleasure in the paved back
tests/les_miserables.txt:44798:courtyard, than in the enclosure filled with flowers, and in his little
tests/les_miserables.txt:44799:lodge furnished with straw-seated chairs than in the great drawing-room
tests/les_miserables.txt:44800:hung with tapestry, against which stood tufted easy-chairs. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:44805:She gave him those charming and tender scoldings which are so graceful
tests/les_miserables.txt:44806:when they come from a daughter to her father.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44808:“Father, I am very cold in your rooms; why don’t you have a carpet here
tests/les_miserables.txt:44812:“Dear child, there are so many people who are better than I and who
tests/les_miserables.txt:44819:“Because you are a woman and a child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44822:“Bah! must men be cold and feel uncomfortable?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44828:“That is good, I shall come here so often that you will be obliged to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44837:“Because, my daughter.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44843:Then, in order to prevent Cosette eating black bread, Jean Valjean ate
tests/les_miserables.txt:44846:Cosette had but a confused recollection of her childhood. She prayed
tests/les_miserables.txt:44849:She remembered that she had gone “one day, at night,” to fetch water in
tests/les_miserables.txt:44852:Valjean who had rescued her from it. Her childhood produced upon her
tests/les_miserables.txt:44853:the effect of a time when there had been nothing around her but
tests/les_miserables.txt:44855:before falling asleep, as she had not a very clear idea that she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:44856:Jean Valjean’s daughter, and that he was her father, she fancied that
tests/les_miserables.txt:44857:the soul of her mother had passed into that good man and had come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44860:When he was seated, she leaned her cheek against his white hair, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:44866:ignorance of a girl brought up in a convent,—maternity being also
tests/les_miserables.txt:44867:absolutely unintelligible to virginity,—had ended by fancying that she
tests/les_miserables.txt:44870:silent. If she repeated her question, he responded with a smile. Once
tests/les_miserables.txt:44873:This silence on the part of Jean Valjean covered Fantine with darkness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44875:Was it prudence? Was it respect? Was it a fear that he should deliver
tests/les_miserables.txt:44879:talk to her of her mother; when she became a young girl, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:44881:Was it because of Cosette? Was it because of Fantine? He felt a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:44883:placing a third in their destiny. The more sacred this shade was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44885:Fantine, and felt himself overwhelmed with silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44887:Through the darkness, he vaguely perceived something which appeared to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44888:have its finger on its lips. Had all the modesty which had been in
tests/les_miserables.txt:44889:Fantine, and which had violently quitted her during her lifetime,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44890:returned to rest upon her after her death, to watch in indignation over
tests/les_miserables.txt:44891:the peace of that dead woman, and in its shyness, to keep her in her
tests/les_miserables.txt:44892:grave? Was Jean Valjean unconsciously submitting to the pressure? We
tests/les_miserables.txt:44893:who believe in death, are not among the number who will reject this
tests/les_miserables.txt:44896:Hence the impossibility of uttering, even for Cosette, that name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:44911:him with delight, at all these sparks of a tenderness so exclusive, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:44913:with angelic joy; he declared to himself ecstatically that this would
tests/les_miserables.txt:44915:sufficiently to merit so radiant a bliss, and he thanked God, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44917:wretch, by that innocent being.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44925:One day, Cosette chanced to look at herself in her mirror, and she said
tests/les_miserables.txt:44928:had never thought of her face. She saw herself in her mirror, but she
tests/les_miserables.txt:44932:in that belief with the easy resignation of childhood. And here, all at
tests/les_miserables.txt:44933:once, was her mirror saying to her, as Jean Valjean had said: “No
tests/les_miserables.txt:44935:thought. “How odd it would be if I were pretty!” And she recalled those
tests/les_miserables.txt:44936:of her companions whose beauty had produced a sensation in the convent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44941:The next morning she looked at herself again, not by accident this
tests/les_miserables.txt:44942:time, and she was assailed with doubts: “Where did I get such an idea?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44945:preceding evening in the belief that she was beautiful, but it made her
tests/les_miserables.txt:44948:hair with her back turned to the mirror.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44951:some convent needlework in the drawing-room, and Jean Valjean read
tests/les_miserables.txt:44952:beside her. Once she raised her eyes from her work, and was rendered
tests/les_miserables.txt:44953:quite uneasy by the manner in which her father was gazing at her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44955:On another occasion, she was passing along the street, and it seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:44962:Toussaint saying: “Do you notice how pretty Cosette is growing, sir?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:44963:Cosette did not hear her father’s reply, but Toussaint’s words caused a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44964:sort of commotion within her. She fled from the garden, ran up to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:44965:room, flew to the looking-glass,—it was three months since she had
tests/les_miserables.txt:44966:looked at herself,—and gave vent to a cry. She had just dazzled
tests/les_miserables.txt:44969:She was beautiful and lovely; she could not help agreeing with
tests/les_miserables.txt:44971:white, her hair was lustrous, an unaccustomed splendor had been lighted
tests/les_miserables.txt:44972:in her blue eyes. The consciousness of her beauty burst upon her in an
tests/les_miserables.txt:44973:instant, like the sudden advent of daylight; other people noticed it
tests/les_miserables.txt:44975:had spoken, there could no longer be any doubt of that; she descended
tests/les_miserables.txt:44978:among the trees, flowers in the thickets, distracted, wild, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:44981:Jean Valjean, on his side, experienced a deep and undefinable
tests/les_miserables.txt:44984:In fact, he had, for some time past, been contemplating with terror
tests/les_miserables.txt:44985:that beauty which seemed to grow more radiant every day on Cosette’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:44986:sweet face. The dawn that was smiling for all was gloomy for him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:44988:Cosette had been beautiful for a tolerably long time before she became
tests/les_miserables.txt:44989:aware of it herself. But, from the very first day, that unexpected
tests/les_miserables.txt:44990:light which was rising slowly and enveloping the whole of the young
tests/les_miserables.txt:44992:change in a happy life, a life so happy that he did not dare to move
tests/les_miserables.txt:44995:of fate, who had been almost wicked and who had become almost a saint,
tests/les_miserables.txt:44996:who, after having dragged the chain of the galleys, was now dragging
tests/les_miserables.txt:44997:the invisible but heavy chain of indefinite misery, this man whom the
tests/les_miserables.txt:44998:law had not released from its grasp and who could be seized at any
tests/les_miserables.txt:44999:moment and brought back from the obscurity of his virtue to the broad
tests/les_miserables.txt:45000:daylight of public opprobrium, this man accepted all, excused all,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45001:pardoned all, and merely asked of Providence, of man, of the law, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45002:society, of nature, of the world, one thing, that Cosette might love
tests/les_miserables.txt:45005:That Cosette might continue to love him! That God would not prevent the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45006:heart of the child from coming to him, and from remaining with him!
tests/les_miserables.txt:45008:loaded with benefits, recompensed, crowned. Beloved by Cosette, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:45015:Everything which could affect this situation, if only on the surface,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45017:known very distinctly himself what the beauty of a woman means; but he
tests/les_miserables.txt:45018:understood instinctively, that it was something terrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45020:He gazed with terror on this beauty, which was blossoming out ever more
tests/les_miserables.txt:45022:innocent and formidable brow of that child, from the depths of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:45025:He said to himself: “How beautiful she is! What is to become of me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45028:There, moreover, lay the difference between his tenderness and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45032:The first symptoms were not long in making their appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45034:On the very morrow of the day on which she had said to herself:
tests/les_miserables.txt:45035:“Decidedly I am beautiful!” Cosette began to pay attention to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:45036:toilet. She recalled the remark of that passer-by: “Pretty, but badly
tests/les_miserables.txt:45037:dressed,” the breath of an oracle which had passed beside her and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:45038:vanished, after depositing in her heart one of the two germs which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:45039:destined, later on, to fill the whole life of woman, coquetry. Love is
tests/les_miserables.txt:45043:She conceived a horror for her merinos, and shame for her plush hat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45044:Her father had never refused her anything. She at once acquired the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45045:whole science of the bonnet, the gown, the mantle, the boot, the cuff,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45046:the stuff which is in fashion, the color which is becoming, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:45047:science which makes of the Parisian woman something so charming, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:45053:dressed” women in Paris, which means a great deal more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45055:She would have liked to encounter her “passer-by,” to see what he would
tests/les_miserables.txt:45056:say, and to “teach him a lesson!” The truth is, that she was ravishing
tests/les_miserables.txt:45057:in every respect, and that she distinguished the difference between a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45060:Jean Valjean watched these ravages with anxiety. He who felt that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:45061:could never do anything but crawl, walk at the most, beheld wings
tests/les_miserables.txt:45064:Moreover, from the mere inspection of Cosette’s toilet, a woman would
tests/les_miserables.txt:45065:have recognized the fact that she had no mother. Certain little
tests/les_miserables.txt:45066:proprieties, certain special conventionalities, were not observed by
tests/les_miserables.txt:45067:Cosette. A mother, for instance, would have told her that a young girl
tests/les_miserables.txt:45070:The first day that Cosette went out in her black damask gown and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45071:mantle, and her white crape bonnet, she took Jean Valjean’s arm, gay,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45073:in this guise?” Jean Valjean replied in a voice which resembled the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45074:bitter voice of an envious man: “Charming!” He was the same as usual
tests/les_miserables.txt:45081:This took place in Cosette’s chamber. Cosette turned towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45082:wardrobe where her cast-off schoolgirl’s clothes were hanging.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45086:machine on my head, I have the air of Madame Mad-dog.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45091:From that moment forth, he noticed that Cosette, who had always
tests/les_miserables.txt:45093:more here with you,” now was always asking to go out. In fact, what is
tests/les_miserables.txt:45094:the use of having a handsome face and a delicious costume if one does
tests/les_miserables.txt:45097:He also noticed that Cosette had no longer the same taste for the back
tests/les_miserables.txt:45099:back and forth in front of the railed fence. Jean Valjean, who was shy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45100:never set foot in the garden. He kept to his back yard, like a dog.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45103:grace of ignoring it. An exquisite grace, for beauty enhanced by
tests/les_miserables.txt:45105:and innocent creature who walks along, holding in her hand the key to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45106:paradise without being conscious of it. But what she had lost in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45107:ingenuous grace, she gained in pensive and serious charm. Her whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:45108:person, permeated with the joy of youth, of innocence, and of beauty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45109:breathed forth a splendid melancholy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45111:It was at this epoch that Marius, after the lapse of six months, saw
tests/les_miserables.txt:45112:her once more at the Luxembourg.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45121:Destiny, with its mysterious and fatal patience, slowly drew together
tests/les_miserables.txt:45122:these two beings, all charged and all languishing with the stormy
tests/les_miserables.txt:45123:electricity of passion, these two souls which were laden with love as
tests/les_miserables.txt:45124:two clouds are laden with lightning, and which were bound to overflow
tests/les_miserables.txt:45125:and mingle in a look like the clouds in a flash of fire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45127:The glance has been so much abused in love romances that it has finally
tests/les_miserables.txt:45129:beings fell in love because they looked at each other. That is the way
tests/les_miserables.txt:45131:nothing, but the rest comes afterwards. Nothing is more real than these
tests/les_miserables.txt:45132:great shocks which two souls convey to each other by the exchange of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45135:At that particular hour when Cosette unconsciously darted that glance
tests/les_miserables.txt:45136:which troubled Marius, Marius had no suspicion that he had also
tests/les_miserables.txt:45137:launched a look which disturbed Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45139:He caused her the same good and the same evil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45142:scrutinized him as girls scrutinize and see, while looking elsewhere.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45143:Marius still considered Cosette ugly, when she had already begun to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45147:Still, she could not refrain from saying to herself that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:45148:beautiful hair, beautiful eyes, handsome teeth, a charming tone of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45149:voice when she heard him conversing with his comrades, that he held
tests/les_miserables.txt:45150:himself badly when he walked, if you like, but with a grace that was
tests/les_miserables.txt:45155:On the day when their eyes met at last, and said to each other those
tests/les_miserables.txt:45156:first, obscure, and ineffable things which the glance lisps, Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:45158:in the Rue de l’Ouest, where Jean Valjean, according to his custom, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:45159:come to spend six weeks. The next morning, on waking, she thought of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45160:that strange young man, so long indifferent and icy, who now seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45162:was the least in the world agreeable to her. She was, on the contrary,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45163:somewhat incensed at this handsome and disdainful individual. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:45164:substratum of war stirred within her. It struck her, and the idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:45165:caused her a wholly childish joy, that she was going to take her
tests/les_miserables.txt:45168:Knowing that she was beautiful, she was thoroughly conscious, though in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45169:an indistinct fashion, that she possessed a weapon. Women play with
tests/les_miserables.txt:45170:their beauty as children do with a knife. They wound themselves.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45172:The reader will recall Marius’ hesitations, his palpitations, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:45173:terrors. He remained on his bench and did not approach. This vexed
tests/les_miserables.txt:45175:about a little in that direction.” Seeing that Marius did not come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45176:her, she went to him. In such cases, all women resemble Mahomet. And
tests/les_miserables.txt:45179:nothing is more simple. It is the two sexes tending to approach each
tests/les_miserables.txt:45180:other and assuming, each the other’s qualities.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45182:That day, Cosette’s glance drove Marius beside himself, and Marius’
tests/les_miserables.txt:45183:glance set Cosette to trembling. Marius went away confident, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45184:Cosette uneasy. From that day forth, they adored each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45186:The first thing that Cosette felt was a confused and profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:45187:melancholy. It seemed to her that her soul had become black since the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45188:day before. She no longer recognized it. The whiteness of soul in young
tests/les_miserables.txt:45189:girls, which is composed of coldness and gayety, resembles snow. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:45190:melts in love, which is its sun.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45193:uttered in its terrestrial sense. On the books of profane music which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45194:entered the convent, _amour_ (love) was replaced by _tambour_ (drum) or
tests/les_miserables.txt:45195:_pandour_. This created enigmas which exercised the imaginations of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45196:_big girls_, such as: _Ah, how delightful is the drum! _ or, _Pity is
tests/les_miserables.txt:45197:not a pandour_. But Cosette had left the convent too early to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:45198:occupied herself much with the “drum.” Therefore, she did not know what
tests/les_miserables.txt:45199:name to give to what she now felt. Is any one the less ill because one
tests/les_miserables.txt:45202:She loved with all the more passion because she loved ignorantly. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:45208:be! You blush and turn pale, when a certain being clad in black appears
tests/les_miserables.txt:45209:at the end of a certain green walk? But that is abominable!” She would
tests/les_miserables.txt:45211:of mine in a matter in which I have no power and of which I know
tests/les_miserables.txt:45215:It turned out that the love which presented itself was exactly suited
tests/les_miserables.txt:45216:to the state of her soul. It was a sort of admiration at a distance, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45217:mute contemplation, the deification of a stranger. It was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45218:apparition of youth to youth, the dream of nights become a reality yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:45221:exigence, nor defect; in a word, the distant lover who lingered in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45222:ideal, a chimæra with a form. Any nearer and more palpable meeting
tests/les_miserables.txt:45224:immersed in the exaggerated mists of the cloister. She had all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45225:fears of children and all the fears of nuns combined. The spirit of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45226:convent, with which she had been permeated for the space of five years,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45227:was still in the process of slow evaporation from her person, and made
tests/les_miserables.txt:45230:Marius as something charming, luminous, and impossible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45232:As extreme innocence borders on extreme coquetry, she smiled at him
tests/les_miserables.txt:45236:impatience, she found Marius there, she felt herself unspeakably happy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45237:and thought in all sincerity that she was expressing her whole thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:45240:“What a delicious garden that Luxembourg is!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45244:address each other, they did not salute each other, they did not know
tests/les_miserables.txt:45245:each other; they saw each other; and like stars of heaven which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:45246:separated by millions of leagues, they lived by gazing at each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45248:It was thus that Cosette gradually became a woman and developed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45249:beautiful and loving, with a consciousness of her beauty, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45250:ignorance of her love. She was a coquette to boot through her
tests/les_miserables.txt:45251:ignorance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45259:All situations have their instincts. Old and eternal Mother Nature
tests/les_miserables.txt:45260:warned Jean Valjean in a dim way of the presence of Marius. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:45262:nothing, knew nothing, and yet he scanned with obstinate attention, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45263:darkness in which he walked, as though he felt on one side of him
tests/les_miserables.txt:45264:something in process of construction, and on the other, something which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45265:was crumbling away. Marius, also warned, and, in accordance with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45266:deep law of God, by that same Mother Nature, did all he could to keep
tests/les_miserables.txt:45267:out of sight of “the father.” Nevertheless, it came to pass that Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:45269:least natural. He exhibited ambiguous prudence and awkward daring. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:45270:no longer came quite close to them as formerly. He seated himself at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45271:distance and pretended to be reading; why did he pretend that? Formerly
tests/les_miserables.txt:45272:he had come in his old coat, now he wore his new one every day; Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:45273:Valjean was not sure that he did not have his hair curled, his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:45274:were very queer, he wore gloves; in short, Jean Valjean cordially
tests/les_miserables.txt:45278:the matter with her she was convinced that there was something in it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45279:and that it must be concealed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45281:There was a coincidence between the taste for the toilet which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:45282:recently come to Cosette, and the habit of new clothes developed by
tests/les_miserables.txt:45283:that stranger which was very repugnant to Jean Valjean. It might be
tests/les_miserables.txt:45284:accidental, no doubt, certainly, but it was a menacing accident.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45287:however, he could not refrain from so doing, and, with that vague
tests/les_miserables.txt:45288:despair which suddenly casts the lead into the depths of its despair,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45289:he said to her: “What a very pedantic air that young man has!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45293:replied: “Why, no, he is charming.” Ten years later, with the love of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45296:the heart which she had then attained, she contented herself with
tests/les_miserables.txt:45297:replying, with supreme calmness: “That young man!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45302:“How stupid I am!” thought Jean Valjean. “She had not noticed him. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:45306:Oh, simplicity of the old! oh, the depth of children!
tests/les_miserables.txt:45309:those vivacious conflicts between a first love and the first obstacles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45310:that the young girl does not allow herself to be caught in any trap
tests/les_miserables.txt:45312:instituted an undeclared war against Marius, which Marius, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45314:Valjean laid a host of ambushes for him; he changed his hour, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:45315:changed his bench, he forgot his handkerchief, he came alone to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45319:apparent unconcern and in her imperturbable tranquillity, so that Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:45320:Valjean arrived at the following conclusion: “That ninny is madly in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45326:begin with indifference?
tests/les_miserables.txt:45328:Only once did Cosette make a mistake and alarm him. He rose from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:45333:Jean Valjean had not discontinued his trips to the Luxembourg, as he
tests/les_miserables.txt:45335:he feared to arouse Cosette; but during the hours which were so sweet
tests/les_miserables.txt:45336:to the lovers, while Cosette was sending her smile to the intoxicated
tests/les_miserables.txt:45337:Marius, who perceived nothing else now, and who now saw nothing in all
tests/les_miserables.txt:45338:the world but an adored and radiant face, Jean Valjean was fixing on
tests/les_miserables.txt:45339:Marius flashing and terrible eyes. He, who had finally come to believe
tests/les_miserables.txt:45340:himself incapable of a malevolent feeling, experienced moments when
tests/les_miserables.txt:45341:Marius was present, in which he thought he was becoming savage and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45342:ferocious once more, and he felt the old depths of his soul, which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:45343:formerly contained so much wrath, opening once more and rising up
tests/les_miserables.txt:45344:against that young man. It almost seemed to him that unknown craters
tests/les_miserables.txt:45347:What! he was there, that creature! What was he there for? He came
tests/les_miserables.txt:45348:creeping about, smelling out, examining, trying! He came, saying: “Hey!
tests/les_miserables.txt:45349:Why not?” He came to prowl about his, Jean Valjean’s, life! to prowl
tests/les_miserables.txt:45353:Jean Valjean added: “Yes, that’s it! What is he in search of? An
tests/les_miserables.txt:45355:What! I have been first, the most wretched of men, and then the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:45357:suffered everything that man can suffer, I have grown old without
tests/les_miserables.txt:45359:without friends, without life, without children, I have left my blood
tests/les_miserables.txt:45362:although others have been malicious, I have become an honest man once
tests/les_miserables.txt:45365:moment when I receive my recompense, at the moment when it is all over,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45366:at the moment when I am just touching the goal, at the moment when I
tests/les_miserables.txt:45369:Cosette, and I shall lose my life, my joy, my soul, because it has
tests/les_miserables.txt:45370:pleased a great booby to come and lounge at the Luxembourg.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45376:surveying an enemy. It was a dog scanning a thief.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45378:The reader knows the rest. Marius pursued his senseless course. One day
tests/les_miserables.txt:45381:“Monsieur, who is that curious young man who is asking for you?” On the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45382:morrow Jean Valjean bestowed on Marius that glance which Marius at last
tests/les_miserables.txt:45383:perceived. A week later, Jean Valjean had taken his departure. He swore
tests/les_miserables.txt:45387:Cosette did not complain, she said nothing, she asked no questions, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:45388:did not seek to learn his reasons; she had already reached the point
tests/les_miserables.txt:45390:Valjean had no experience of these miseries, the only miseries which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45391:are charming and the only ones with which he was not acquainted; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45392:consequence was that he did not understand the grave significance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45393:Cosette’s silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45395:He merely noticed that she had grown sad, and he grew gloomy. On his
tests/les_miserables.txt:45396:side and on hers, inexperience had joined issue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45398:Once he made a trial. He asked Cosette:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:45400:“Would you like to come to the Luxembourg?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45403:A ray illuminated Cosette’s pale face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45412:“Would you like to come to the Luxembourg?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45423:What was going on in that mind which was so young and yet already so
tests/les_miserables.txt:45424:impenetrable? What was on its way there within? What was taking place
tests/les_miserables.txt:45430:Oh! at such moments, what mournful glances did he cast towards that
tests/les_miserables.txt:45431:cloister, that chaste peak, that abode of angels, that inaccessible
tests/les_miserables.txt:45432:glacier of virtue! How he contemplated, with despairing ecstasy, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:45433:convent garden, full of ignored flowers and cloistered virgins, where
tests/les_miserables.txt:45435:Eden forever closed against him, whence he had voluntarily and madly
tests/les_miserables.txt:45437:brought Cosette back into the world, poor hero of sacrifice, seized and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45442:However, nothing of all this was perceptible to Cosette. No ill-temper,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45443:no harshness. His face was always serene and kind. Jean Valjean’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:45444:manners were more tender and more paternal than ever. If anything could
tests/les_miserables.txt:45445:have betrayed his lack of joy, it was his increased suavity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45447:On her side, Cosette languished. She suffered from the absence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45448:Marius as she had rejoiced in his presence, peculiarly, without exactly
tests/les_miserables.txt:45449:being conscious of it. When Jean Valjean ceased to take her on their
tests/les_miserables.txt:45450:customary strolls, a feminine instinct murmured confusedly, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45453:indifference to her, her father would take her thither once more. But
tests/les_miserables.txt:45454:days, weeks, months, elapsed. Jean Valjean had tacitly accepted
tests/les_miserables.txt:45455:Cosette’s tacit consent. She regretted it. It was too late. So Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:45456:had disappeared; all was over. The day on which she returned to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45458:ever find him again? She felt an anguish at her heart, which nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:45459:relieved, and which augmented every day; she no longer knew whether it
tests/les_miserables.txt:45462:whether the Luxembourg was more charming than the Tuileries, whether
tests/les_miserables.txt:45463:the linen which the laundress brought home was starched too much or not
tests/les_miserables.txt:45465:remained dejected, absorbed, attentive to but a single thought, her
tests/les_miserables.txt:45466:eyes vague and staring as when one gazes by night at a black and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45469:However, she did not allow Jean Valjean to perceive anything of this,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45470:except her pallor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45472:She still wore her sweet face for him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45474:This pallor sufficed but too thoroughly to trouble Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45483:And after a silence, when she divined that he was sad also, she would
tests/les_miserables.txt:45491:These two beings who had loved each other so exclusively, and with so
tests/les_miserables.txt:45492:touching an affection, and who had lived so long for each other now
tests/les_miserables.txt:45493:suffered side by side, each on the other’s account; without
tests/les_miserables.txt:45494:acknowledging it to each other, without anger towards each other, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45504:sorrows, always possesses its own peculiar radiance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45506:At times, Jean Valjean suffered so greatly that he became puerile. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:45507:is the property of grief to cause the childish side of man to reappear.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45508:He had an unconquerable conviction that Cosette was escaping from him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45511:just said, and at the same time senile, conveyed to him, by their very
tests/les_miserables.txt:45512:childishness, a tolerably just notion of the influence of gold lace on
tests/les_miserables.txt:45513:the imaginations of young girls. He once chanced to see a general on
tests/les_miserables.txt:45514:horseback, in full uniform, pass along the street, Comte Coutard, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45515:commandant of Paris. He envied that gilded man; what happiness it would
tests/les_miserables.txt:45516:be, he said to himself, if he could put on that suit which was an
tests/les_miserables.txt:45517:incontestable thing; and if Cosette could behold him thus, she would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:45519:Tuileries, the guard would present arms to him, and that would suffice
tests/les_miserables.txt:45522:An unforeseen shock was added to these sad reflections.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45524:In the isolated life which they led, and since they had come to dwell
tests/les_miserables.txt:45525:in the Rue Plumet, they had contracted one habit. They sometimes took a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45526:pleasure trip to see the sun rise, a mild species of enjoyment which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45530:to a stroll by night, with the cheerfulness of nature added. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:45532:herself, liked to rise early. These matutinal excursions were planned
tests/les_miserables.txt:45533:on the preceding evening. He proposed, and she agreed. It was arranged
tests/les_miserables.txt:45535:small delights for Cosette. These innocent eccentricities please young
tests/les_miserables.txt:45538:Jean Valjean’s inclination led him, as we have seen, to the least
tests/les_miserables.txt:45539:frequented spots, to solitary nooks, to forgotten places. There then
tests/les_miserables.txt:45540:existed, in the vicinity of the barriers of Paris, a sort of poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:45541:meadows, which were almost confounded with the city, where grew in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45542:summer sickly grain, and which, in autumn, after the harvest had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:45543:gathered, presented the appearance, not of having been reaped, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:45545:there. It meant solitude to him and liberty to her. There, she became a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45546:little girl once more, she could run and almost play; she took off her
tests/les_miserables.txt:45547:hat, laid it on Jean Valjean’s knees, and gathered bunches of flowers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45548:She gazed at the butterflies on the flowers, but did not catch them;
tests/les_miserables.txt:45550:cherishes within her breast a trembling and fragile ideal has mercy on
tests/les_miserables.txt:45551:the wing of a butterfly. She wove garlands of poppies, which she placed
tests/les_miserables.txt:45552:on her head, and which, crossed and penetrated with sunlight, glowing
tests/les_miserables.txt:45553:until they flamed, formed for her rosy face a crown of burning embers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45555:Even after their life had grown sad, they kept up their custom of early
tests/les_miserables.txt:45558:One morning in October, therefore, tempted by the serene perfection of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45561:delightful and stern moment. A few constellations here and there in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45562:deep, pale azure, the earth all black, the heavens all white, a quiver
tests/les_miserables.txt:45563:amid the blades of grass, everywhere the mysterious chill of twilight.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45564:A lark, which seemed mingled with the stars, was carolling at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45565:prodigious height, and one would have declared that that hymn of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45566:pettiness calmed immensity. In the East, the Val-de-Grâce projected its
tests/les_miserables.txt:45567:dark mass on the clear horizon with the sharpness of steel; Venus
tests/les_miserables.txt:45569:soul making its escape from a gloomy edifice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45571:All was peace and silence; there was no one on the road; a few stray
tests/les_miserables.txt:45572:laborers, of whom they caught barely a glimpse, were on their way to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45575:Jean Valjean was sitting in a cross-walk on some planks deposited at
tests/les_miserables.txt:45576:the gate of a timber-yard. His face was turned towards the highway, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:45577:back towards the light; he had forgotten the sun which was on the point
tests/les_miserables.txt:45578:of rising; he had sunk into one of those profound absorptions in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45579:the mind becomes concentrated, which imprison even the eye, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45580:are equivalent to four walls. There are meditations which may be called
tests/les_miserables.txt:45581:vertical; when one is at the bottom of them, time is required to return
tests/les_miserables.txt:45583:thinking of Cosette, of the happiness that was possible if nothing came
tests/les_miserables.txt:45584:between him and her, of the light with which she filled his life, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45585:light which was but the emanation of her soul. He was almost happy in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45587:clouds as they turned rosy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45589:All at once Cosette exclaimed: “Father, I should think some one was
tests/les_miserables.txt:45590:coming yonder.” Jean Valjean raised his eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45592:Cosette was right. The causeway which leads to the ancient Barrière du
tests/les_miserables.txt:45594:is cut at right angles by the inner boulevard. At the elbow of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45595:causeway and the boulevard, at the spot where it branches, they heard a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45596:noise which it was difficult to account for at that hour, and a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45597:confused pile made its appearance. Some shapeless thing which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:45598:coming from the boulevard was turning into the road.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45601:bristling and quivering; it seemed to be a vehicle, but its load could
tests/les_miserables.txt:45602:not be distinctly made out. There were horses, wheels, shouts; whips
tests/les_miserables.txt:45603:were cracking. By degrees the outlines became fixed, although bathed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45604:shadows. It was a vehicle, in fact, which had just turned from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45605:boulevard into the highway, and which was directing its course towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:45606:the barrier near which sat Jean Valjean; a second, of the same aspect,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45607:followed, then a third, then a fourth; seven chariots made their
tests/les_miserables.txt:45608:appearance in succession, the heads of the horses touching the rear of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45609:the wagon in front. Figures were moving on these vehicles, flashes were
tests/les_miserables.txt:45611:clanking became audible which resembled the rattling of chains, and as
tests/les_miserables.txt:45612:this something advanced, the sound of voices waxed louder, and it
tests/les_miserables.txt:45613:turned into a terrible thing such as emerges from the cave of dreams.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45617:which was slowly dawning, cast a wan light on this swarming heap which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45618:was at once both sepulchral and living, the heads of the figures turned
tests/les_miserables.txt:45619:into the faces of corpses, and this is what it proved to be:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:45622:singularly constructed. They resembled coopers’ drays; they consisted
tests/les_miserables.txt:45623:of long ladders placed on two wheels and forming barrows at their rear
tests/les_miserables.txt:45624:extremities. Each dray, or rather let us say, each ladder, was attached
tests/les_miserables.txt:45625:to four horses harnessed tandem. On these ladders strange clusters of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45627:rather than seen. Twenty-four on each vehicle, twelve on a side, back
tests/les_miserables.txt:45628:to back, facing the passers-by, their legs dangling in the air,—this
tests/les_miserables.txt:45629:was the manner in which these men were travelling, and behind their
tests/les_miserables.txt:45630:backs they had something which clanked, and which was a chain, and on
tests/les_miserables.txt:45631:their necks something which shone, and which was an iron collar. Each
tests/les_miserables.txt:45632:man had his collar, but the chain was for all; so that if these four
tests/les_miserables.txt:45633:and twenty men had occasion to alight from the dray and walk, they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:45635:the ground with the chain for a backbone, somewhat after the fashion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45636:millepeds. In the back and front of each vehicle, two men armed with
tests/les_miserables.txt:45637:muskets stood erect, each holding one end of the chain under his foot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45638:The iron necklets were square. The seventh vehicle, a huge rack-sided
tests/les_miserables.txt:45640:carried a sonorous pile of iron boilers, cast-iron pots, braziers, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45641:chains, among which were mingled several men who were pinioned and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45642:stretched at full length, and who seemed to be ill. This wagon, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:45643:lattice-work, was garnished with dilapidated hurdles which appeared to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45644:have served for former punishments. These vehicles kept to the middle
tests/les_miserables.txt:45645:of the road. On each side marched a double hedge of guards of infamous
tests/les_miserables.txt:45646:aspect, wearing three-cornered hats, like the soldiers under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45647:Directory, shabby, covered with spots and holes, muffled in uniforms of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45649:which were almost hanging in rags, with red epaulets, yellow shoulder
tests/les_miserables.txt:45650:belts, short sabres, muskets, and cudgels; they were a species of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45651:soldier-blackguards. These myrmidons seemed composed of the abjectness
tests/les_miserables.txt:45652:of the beggar and the authority of the executioner. The one who
tests/les_miserables.txt:45653:appeared to be their chief held a postilion’s whip in his hand. All
tests/les_miserables.txt:45654:these details, blurred by the dimness of dawn, became more and more
tests/les_miserables.txt:45655:clearly outlined as the light increased. At the head and in the rear of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45656:the convoy rode mounted gendarmes, serious and with sword in fist.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45658:This procession was so long that when the first vehicle reached the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45659:barrier, the last was barely debauching from the boulevard. A throng,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45660:sprung, it is impossible to say whence, and formed in a twinkling, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:45661:is frequently the case in Paris, pressed forward from both sides of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45663:calling to each other and the wooden shoes of market-gardeners
tests/les_miserables.txt:45667:silence. They were livid with the chill of morning. They all wore linen
tests/les_miserables.txt:45669:of their costume was a fantasy of wretchedness. Their accoutrements
tests/les_miserables.txt:45670:were horribly incongruous; nothing is more funereal than the harlequin
tests/les_miserables.txt:45671:in rags. Battered felt hats, tarpaulin caps, hideous woollen nightcaps,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45672:and, side by side with a short blouse, a black coat broken at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45675:tattooed designs could be descried; temples of Love, flaming hearts,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45676:Cupids; eruptions and unhealthy red blotches could also be seen. Two or
tests/les_miserables.txt:45677:three had a straw rope attached to the cross-bar of the dray, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45678:suspended under them like a stirrup, which supported their feet. One of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45679:them held in his hand and raised to his mouth something which had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45680:appearance of a black stone and which he seemed to be gnawing; it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:45681:bread which he was eating. There were no eyes there which were not
tests/les_miserables.txt:45682:either dry, dulled, or flaming with an evil light. The escort troop
tests/les_miserables.txt:45683:cursed, the men in chains did not utter a syllable; from time to time
tests/les_miserables.txt:45684:the sound of a blow became audible as the cudgels descended on
tests/les_miserables.txt:45686:were terrible; their feet hung down, their shoulders oscillated, their
tests/les_miserables.txt:45687:heads clashed together, their fetters clanked, their eyes glared
tests/les_miserables.txt:45688:ferociously, their fists clenched or fell open inertly like the hands
tests/les_miserables.txt:45689:of corpses; in the rear of the convoy ran a band of children screaming
tests/les_miserables.txt:45692:This file of vehicles, whatever its nature was, was mournful. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:45693:evident that to-morrow, that an hour hence, a pouring rain might
tests/les_miserables.txt:45694:descend, that it might be followed by another and another, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:45695:their dilapidated garments would be drenched, that once soaked, these
tests/les_miserables.txt:45696:men would not get dry again, that once chilled, they would not again
tests/les_miserables.txt:45699:from the whips would be able to prevent their jaws from chattering,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45700:that the chain would continue to bind them by the neck, that their legs
tests/les_miserables.txt:45701:would continue to dangle, and it was impossible not to shudder at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45702:sight of these human beings thus bound and passive beneath the cold
tests/les_miserables.txt:45703:clouds of autumn, and delivered over to the rain, to the blast, to all
tests/les_miserables.txt:45706:Blows from the cudgel were not omitted even in the case of the sick
tests/les_miserables.txt:45708:wagon, and who appeared to have been tossed there like sacks filled
tests/les_miserables.txt:45711:Suddenly, the sun made its appearance; the immense light of the Orient
tests/les_miserables.txt:45713:ferocious heads. Their tongues were unloosed; a conflagration of grins,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45716:wheels in the obscurity. Thoughts made their appearance on these faces;
tests/les_miserables.txt:45718:fierce souls laid bare. Though lighted up, this wild throng remained in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45719:gloom. Some, who were gay, had in their mouths quills through which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45720:they blew vermin over the crowd, picking out the women; the dawn
tests/les_miserables.txt:45721:accentuated these lamentable profiles with the blackness of its
tests/les_miserables.txt:45722:shadows; there was not one of these creatures who was not deformed by
tests/les_miserables.txt:45723:reason of wretchedness; and the whole was so monstrous that one would
tests/les_miserables.txt:45724:have said that the sun’s brilliancy had been changed into the glare of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45725:the lightning. The wagon-load which headed the line had struck up a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45726:song, and were shouting at the top of their voices with a haggard
tests/les_miserables.txt:45727:joviality, a pot-pourri by Desaugiers, then famous, called _The
tests/les_miserables.txt:45728:Vestal_; the trees shivered mournfully; in the cross-lanes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45729:countenances of bourgeois listened in an idiotic delight to these
tests/les_miserables.txt:45730:coarse strains droned by spectres.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45732:All sorts of distress met in this procession as in chaos; here were to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45733:be found the facial angles of every sort of beast, old men, youths,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45734:bald heads, gray beards, cynical monstrosities, sour resignation,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45735:savage grins, senseless attitudes, snouts surmounted by caps, heads
tests/les_miserables.txt:45736:like those of young girls with corkscrew curls on the temples,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45737:infantile visages, and by reason of that, horrible thin skeleton faces,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45738:to which death alone was lacking. On the first cart was a negro, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:45739:had been a slave, in all probability, and who could make a comparison
tests/les_miserables.txt:45740:of his chains. The frightful leveller from below, shame, had passed
tests/les_miserables.txt:45742:were suffered by all in their extremest depths, and ignorance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45743:converted into dulness, was the equal of intelligence converted into
tests/les_miserables.txt:45744:despair. There was no choice possible between these men who appeared to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45746:had had the ordering of that unclean procession had not classified
tests/les_miserables.txt:45747:them. These beings had been fettered and coupled pell-mell, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45748:alphabetical disorder, probably, and loaded hap-hazard on those carts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45750:result; all additions of wretched men give a sum total, each chain
tests/les_miserables.txt:45751:exhaled a common soul, and each dray-load had its own physiognomy. By
tests/les_miserables.txt:45753:were howling; a third where they were begging; one could be seen in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45754:which they were gnashing their teeth; another load menaced the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45755:spectators, another blasphemed God; the last was as silent as the tomb.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45756:Dante would have thought that he beheld his seven circles of hell on
tests/les_miserables.txt:45757:the march. The march of the damned to their tortures, performed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45758:sinister wise, not on the formidable and flaming chariot of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45759:Apocalypse, but, what was more mournful than that, on the gibbet cart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45761:One of the guards, who had a hook on the end of his cudgel, made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45762:pretence from time to time, of stirring up this mass of human filth. An
tests/les_miserables.txt:45763:old woman in the crowd pointed them out to her little boy five years
tests/les_miserables.txt:45764:old, and said to him: “Rascal, let that be a warning to you!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45767:As the songs and blasphemies increased, the man who appeared to be the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45768:captain of the escort cracked his whip, and at that signal a fearful
tests/les_miserables.txt:45769:dull and blind flogging, which produced the sound of hail, fell upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:45770:the seven dray-loads; many roared and foamed at the mouth; which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45771:redoubled the delight of the street urchins who had hastened up, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45775:longer eyes; they were those deep and glassy objects which replace the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45776:glance in the case of certain wretched men, which seem unconscious of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45777:reality, and in which flames the reflection of terrors and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45778:catastrophes. He was not looking at a spectacle, he was seeing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45779:vision. He tried to rise, to flee, to make his escape; he could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:45782:asking himself, athwart confused and inexpressible anguish, what this
tests/les_miserables.txt:45783:sepulchral persecution signified, and whence had come that pandemonium
tests/les_miserables.txt:45784:which was pursuing him. All at once, he raised his hand to his brow, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45786:that this was, in fact, the usual itinerary, that it was customary to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45787:make this detour in order to avoid all possibility of encountering
tests/les_miserables.txt:45793:length she cried:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:45795:“Father! What are those men in those carts?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45798:Jean Valjean replied: “Convicts.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45807:At that moment, the cudgelling, multiplied by a hundred hands, became
tests/les_miserables.txt:45809:a perfect storm of whips and clubs; the convicts bent before it, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45810:hideous obedience was evoked by the torture, and all held their peace,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45811:darting glances like chained wolves.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45820:It was the chain-gang, in fact, which had set out before daybreak from
tests/les_miserables.txt:45821:Bicêtre, and had taken the road to Mans in order to avoid
tests/les_miserables.txt:45822:Fontainebleau, where the King then was. This caused the horrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:45824:prolonged with the object of sparing the royal personage a sight of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45826:Jean Valjean returned home utterly overwhelmed. Such encounters are
tests/les_miserables.txt:45827:shocks, and the memory that they leave behind them resembles a thorough
tests/les_miserables.txt:45830:Nevertheless, Jean Valjean did not observe that, on his way back to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45832:questions on the subject of what they had just seen; perhaps he was too
tests/les_miserables.txt:45833:much absorbed in his own dejection to notice her words and reply to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45835:herself to bed, he heard her say in a low voice, and as though talking
tests/les_miserables.txt:45837:my pathway, oh, my God, I should die merely from the sight of him close
tests/les_miserables.txt:45841:Fortunately, chance ordained that on the morrow of that tragic day,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45842:there was some official solemnity apropos of I know not what,—fêtes in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45843:Paris, a review in the Champ de Mars, jousts on the Seine, theatrical
tests/les_miserables.txt:45844:performances in the Champs-Élysées, fireworks at the Arc de l’Étoile,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45845:illuminations everywhere. Jean Valjean did violence to his habits, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:45846:took Cosette to see these rejoicings, for the purpose of diverting her
tests/les_miserables.txt:45847:from the memory of the day before, and of effacing, beneath the smiling
tests/les_miserables.txt:45848:tumult of all Paris, the abominable thing which had passed before her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45849:The review with which the festival was spiced made the presence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45850:uniforms perfectly natural; Jean Valjean donned his uniform of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45852:himself to shelter. However, this trip seemed to attain its object.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45854:moreover, all spectacles were a novelty, accepted this diversion with
tests/les_miserables.txt:45855:the light and easy good grace of youth, and did not pout too
tests/les_miserables.txt:45856:disdainfully at that flutter of enjoyment called a public fête; so that
tests/les_miserables.txt:45857:Jean Valjean was able to believe that he had succeeded, and that no
tests/les_miserables.txt:45858:trace of that hideous vision remained.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45861:they were both on the steps leading to the garden, another infraction
tests/les_miserables.txt:45862:of the rules which Jean Valjean seemed to have imposed upon himself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45863:and to the custom of remaining in her chamber which melancholy had
tests/les_miserables.txt:45864:caused Cosette to adopt, Cosette, in a wrapper, was standing erect in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45865:that negligent attire of early morning which envelops young girls in an
tests/les_miserables.txt:45866:adorable way and which produces the effect of a cloud drawn over a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45868:submitting to the gentle glances of the tender old man, she was picking
tests/les_miserables.txt:45869:a daisy to pieces. Cosette did not know the delightful legend, _I love
tests/les_miserables.txt:45870:a little, passionately, etc_.—who was there who could have taught her?
tests/les_miserables.txt:45871:She was handling the flower instinctively, innocently, without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45872:suspicion that to pluck a daisy apart is to do the same by a heart. If
tests/les_miserables.txt:45873:there were a fourth, and smiling Grace called Melancholy, she would
tests/les_miserables.txt:45874:have worn the air of that Grace. Jean Valjean was fascinated by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45875:contemplation of those tiny fingers on that flower, and forgetful of
tests/les_miserables.txt:45876:everything in the radiance emitted by that child. A red-breast was
tests/les_miserables.txt:45877:warbling in the thicket, on one side. White cloudlets floated across
tests/les_miserables.txt:45881:it must be something charming; all at once she turned her head over her
tests/les_miserables.txt:45882:shoulder with the delicate languor of a swan, and said to Jean Valjean:
tests/les_miserables.txt:45897:Thus their life clouded over by degrees.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45899:But one diversion, which had formerly been a happiness, remained to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45900:them, which was to carry bread to those who were hungry, and clothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:45901:to those who were cold. Cosette often accompanied Jean Valjean on these
tests/les_miserables.txt:45902:visits to the poor, on which they recovered some remnants of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:45903:former free intercourse; and sometimes, when the day had been a good
tests/les_miserables.txt:45904:one, and they had assisted many in distress, and cheered and warmed
tests/les_miserables.txt:45905:many little children, Cosette was rather merry in the evening. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:45906:at this epoch that they paid their visit to the Jondrette den.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45908:On the day following that visit, Jean Valjean made his appearance in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45909:the pavilion in the morning, calm as was his wont, but with a large
tests/les_miserables.txt:45910:wound on his left arm which was much inflamed, and very angry, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:45911:resembled a burn, and which he explained in some way or other. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:45913:fever. He would not call in a doctor. When Cosette urged him, “Call the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45914:dog-doctor,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45917:such angelic happiness at being of use to him, that Jean Valjean felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:45923:Cosette on perceiving that her father was ill, had deserted the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45924:pavilion and again taken a fancy to the little lodging and the back
tests/les_miserables.txt:45925:courtyard. She passed nearly all her days beside Jean Valjean and read
tests/les_miserables.txt:45926:to him the books which he desired. Generally they were books of travel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45929:Cosette’s coldness,—all these clouds upon his soul were growing dim. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:45930:had reached the point where he said to himself: “I imagined all that. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:45934:His happiness was so great that the horrible discovery of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45935:Thénardiers made in the Jondrette hovel, unexpected as it was, had,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45936:after a fashion, glided over him unnoticed. He had succeeded in making
tests/les_miserables.txt:45937:his escape; all trace of him was lost—what more did he care for! he
tests/les_miserables.txt:45938:only thought of those wretched beings to pity them. “Here they are in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45939:prison, and henceforth they will be incapacitated for doing any harm,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:45946:Sister Sainte-Mechtilde had taught Cosette music in the convent;
tests/les_miserables.txt:45947:Cosette had the voice of a linnet with a soul, and sometimes, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45948:evening, in the wounded man’s humble abode, she warbled melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:45949:songs which delighted Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45951:Spring came; the garden was so delightful at that season of the year,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45961:was probably afraid of being seen through the fence, hardly ever went
tests/les_miserables.txt:45964:Jean Valjean’s wound had created a diversion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45967:convalescing, and that he appeared to be happy, she experienced a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45968:contentment which she did not even perceive, so gently and naturally
tests/les_miserables.txt:45969:had it come. Then, it was in the month of March, the days were growing
tests/les_miserables.txt:45971:a portion of our sadness; then came April, that daybreak of summer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45972:fresh as dawn always is, gay like every childhood; a little inclined to
tests/les_miserables.txt:45974:has charming gleams which pass from the sky, from the trees, from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45977:Cosette was still too young to escape the penetrating influence of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:45978:April joy which bore so strong a resemblance to herself. Insensibly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:45979:and without her suspecting the fact, the blackness departed from her
tests/les_miserables.txt:45980:spirit. In spring, sad souls grow light, as light falls into cellars at
tests/les_miserables.txt:45982:not account for it to herself. In the morning, about ten o’clock, after
tests/les_miserables.txt:45983:breakfast, when she had succeeded in enticing her father into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:45984:garden for a quarter of an hour, and when she was pacing up and down in
tests/les_miserables.txt:45986:she did not perceive that she laughed every moment and that she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:45989:Jean Valjean, intoxicated, beheld her growing fresh and rosy once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45995:His wound once healed, he resumed his solitary twilight strolls.
tests/les_miserables.txt:45997:It is a mistake to suppose that a person can stroll alone in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:46008:One evening, little Gavroche had had nothing to eat; he remembered that
tests/les_miserables.txt:46009:he had not dined on the preceding day either; this was becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:46010:tiresome. He resolved to make an effort to secure some supper. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:46013:finds something. He reached a settlement which appeared to him to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:46016:In one of his preceding lounges he had noticed there an old garden
tests/les_miserables.txt:46018:apple-tree. Beside the apple-tree stood a sort of fruit-house, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:46019:was not securely fastened, and where one might contrive to get an
tests/les_miserables.txt:46020:apple. One apple is a supper; one apple is life. That which was Adam’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:46021:ruin might prove Gavroche’s salvation. The garden abutted on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46025:Gavroche directed his steps towards this garden; he found the lane, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:46026:recognized the apple-tree, he verified the fruit-house, he examined the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46027:hedge; a hedge means merely one stride. The day was declining, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:46028:was not even a cat in the lane, the hour was propitious. Gavroche began
tests/les_miserables.txt:46029:the operation of scaling the hedge, then suddenly paused. Some one was
tests/les_miserables.txt:46030:talking in the garden. Gavroche peeped through one of the breaks in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46033:[Illustration: Succor from Below]
tests/les_miserables.txt:46035:A couple of paces distant, at the foot of the hedge on the other side,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46036:exactly at the point where the gap which he was meditating would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:46037:been made, there was a sort of recumbent stone which formed a bench,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46038:and on this bench was seated the old man of the garden, while the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:46040:Gavroche, who was not very discreet, listened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46044:“Mabeuf!” thought Gavroche, “that name is a perfect farce.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:46059:“Mother Plutarque!” thought Gavroche, “another farcical name.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:46062:Mother Plutarque began again, and the old man was forced to accept the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46063:conversation:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:46083:“The green-grocer insists on being paid. She will no longer leave her
tests/les_miserables.txt:46091:“The butcher refuses to give credit; he will not let us have any more
tests/les_miserables.txt:46116:“But, Monsieur, we can’t live like that without money.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:46123:thought. Gavroche became thoughtful also. It was almost dark.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46125:The first result of Gavroche’s meditation was, that instead of scaling
tests/les_miserables.txt:46126:the hedge, he crouched down under it. The branches stood apart a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:46127:at the foot of the thicket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46129:“Come,” exclaimed Gavroche mentally, “here’s a nook!” and he curled up
tests/les_miserables.txt:46130:in it. His back was almost in contact with Father Mabeuf’s bench. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:46131:could hear the octogenarian breathe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46135:It was a cat-nap, with one eye open. While he dozed, Gavroche kept on
tests/les_miserables.txt:46136:the watch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46138:The twilight pallor of the sky blanched the earth, and the lane formed
tests/les_miserables.txt:46141:All at once, in this whitish band, two figures made their appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46142:One was in front, the other some distance in the rear.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46144:“There come two creatures,” muttered Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46148:because of his age, and strolling about in the open evening air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46150:The second was straight, firm, slender. It regulated its pace by that
tests/les_miserables.txt:46152:agility were discernible. This figure had also something fierce and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46153:disquieting about it, the whole shape was that of what was then called
tests/les_miserables.txt:46154:_an elegant_; the hat was of good shape, the coat black, well cut,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46155:probably of fine cloth, and well fitted in at the waist. The head was
tests/les_miserables.txt:46156:held erect with a sort of robust grace, and beneath the hat the pale
tests/les_miserables.txt:46157:profile of a young man could be made out in the dim light. The profile
tests/les_miserables.txt:46158:had a rose in its mouth. This second form was well known to Gavroche;
tests/les_miserables.txt:46161:He could have told nothing about the other, except that he was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46162:respectable old man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46164:Gavroche immediately began to take observations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46166:One of these two pedestrians evidently had a project connected with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46167:other. Gavroche was well placed to watch the course of events. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:46168:bedroom had turned into a hiding-place at a very opportune moment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46170:Montparnasse on the hunt at such an hour, in such a place, betokened
tests/les_miserables.txt:46171:something threatening. Gavroche felt his gamin’s heart moved with
tests/les_miserables.txt:46172:compassion for the old man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46174:What was he to do? Interfere? One weakness coming to the aid of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46176:Gavroche did not shut his eyes to the fact that the old man, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46177:first place, and the child in the second, would make but two mouthfuls
tests/les_miserables.txt:46180:While Gavroche was deliberating, the attack took place, abruptly and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46181:hideously. The attack of the tiger on the wild ass, the attack of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46183:upon the old man, seized him by the collar, grasped and clung to him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46184:and Gavroche with difficulty restrained a scream. A moment later one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46186:of marble upon his breast. Only, it was not just what Gavroche had
tests/les_miserables.txt:46187:expected. The one who lay on the earth was Montparnasse; the one who
tests/les_miserables.txt:46188:was on top was the old man. All this took place a few paces distant
tests/les_miserables.txt:46189:from Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46191:The old man had received the shock, had returned it, and that in such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46193:had exchanged rôles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46195:“Here’s a hearty veteran!” thought Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46197:He could not refrain from clapping his hands. But it was applause
tests/les_miserables.txt:46198:wasted. It did not reach the combatants, absorbed and deafened as they
tests/les_miserables.txt:46199:were, each by the other, as their breath mingled in the struggle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46201:Silence ensued. Montparnasse ceased his struggles. Gavroche indulged in
tests/les_miserables.txt:46205:The goodman had not uttered a word, nor given vent to a cry. He rose to
tests/les_miserables.txt:46206:his feet, and Gavroche heard him say to Montparnasse:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:46213:been caught by a sheep.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46215:Gavroche looked on and listened, making an effort to reinforce his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:46218:He was repaid for his conscientious anxiety in the character of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46219:spectator. He was able to catch on the wing a dialogue which borrowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:46220:from the darkness an indescribably tragic accent. The goodman
tests/les_miserables.txt:46252:twitchings of a wild beast caught in a snare. He gave a jerk, tried a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46253:crook of the knee, twisted his limbs desperately, and made efforts to
tests/les_miserables.txt:46254:escape.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46256:The old man did not appear to notice it, and held both his arms with
tests/les_miserables.txt:46257:one hand, with the sovereign indifference of absolute force.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46260:Montparnasse, he addressed to him in a gentle voice, in the midst of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46261:the darkness where they stood, a solemn harangue, of which Gavroche did
tests/les_miserables.txt:46264:“My child, you are entering, through indolence, on one of the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:46265:laborious of lives. Ah! You declare yourself to be an idler! prepare to
tests/les_miserables.txt:46266:toil. There is a certain formidable machine, have you seen it? It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:46267:the rolling-mill. You must be on your guard against it, it is crafty
tests/les_miserables.txt:46268:and ferocious; if it catches hold of the skirt of your coat, you will
tests/les_miserables.txt:46269:be drawn in bodily. That machine is laziness. Stop while there is yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:46271:time you will be among the gearing. Once entangled, hope for nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:46273:of implacable toil has seized you. You do not wish to earn your living,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46275:Well! You will be different. Labor is the law; he who rejects it will
tests/les_miserables.txt:46283:the sailor, the blacksmith, will appear to you in glory like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46284:blessed spirits in paradise. What radiance surrounds the forge! To
tests/les_miserables.txt:46287:march! Drag your halter. You are a beast of burden in the team of hell!
tests/les_miserables.txt:46288:Ah! To do nothing is your object. Well, not a week, not a day, not an
tests/les_miserables.txt:46291:muscles crack. What is a feather to others will be a rock to you. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:46292:simplest things will become steep acclivities. Life will become
tests/les_miserables.txt:46293:monstrous all about you. To go, to come, to breathe, will be just so
tests/les_miserables.txt:46294:many terrible labors. Your lungs will produce on you the effect of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46296:there, will become a problem that must be solved. Any one who wants to
tests/les_miserables.txt:46298:If you wish to go out, you will be obliged to pierce your wall. What
tests/les_miserables.txt:46301:make of them a rope, then you will climb out of your window, and you
tests/les_miserables.txt:46303:night, amid storm, rain, and the hurricane, and if the rope is too
tests/les_miserables.txt:46304:short, but one way of descending will remain to you, to fall. To drop
tests/les_miserables.txt:46306:beneath, on the unknown. Or you will crawl up a chimney-flue, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46307:risk of burning; or you will creep through a sewer-pipe, at the risk of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46309:of the stones which you will have to take up and replace twenty times a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46311:lock presents itself; the bourgeois has in his pocket a key made by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46312:locksmith. If you wish to pass out, you will be condemned to execute a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46313:terrible work of art; you will take a large sou, you will cut it in two
tests/les_miserables.txt:46316:great care of the outside, and you will make on the edges a thread, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:46317:that they can be adjusted one upon the other like a box and its cover.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46318:The top and bottom thus screwed together, nothing will be suspected. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:46320:you put in this box? A small bit of steel. A watch-spring, in which you
tests/les_miserables.txt:46321:will have cut teeth, and which will form a saw. With this saw, as long
tests/les_miserables.txt:46322:as a pin, and concealed in a sou, you will cut the bolt of the lock,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46323:you will sever bolts, the padlock of your chain, and the bar at your
tests/les_miserables.txt:46324:window, and the fetter on your leg. This masterpiece finished, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:46325:prodigy accomplished, all these miracles of art, address, skill, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46326:patience executed, what will be your recompense if it becomes known
tests/les_miserables.txt:46328:precipices are idleness and pleasure! Do you know that to do nothing is
tests/les_miserables.txt:46329:a melancholy resolution? To live in idleness on the property of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46330:society! to be useless, that is to say, pernicious! This leads straight
tests/les_miserables.txt:46331:to the depth of wretchedness. Woe to the man who desires to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46332:parasite! He will become vermin! Ah! So it does not please you to work?
tests/les_miserables.txt:46334:well. You will drink water, you will eat black bread, you will sleep on
tests/les_miserables.txt:46335:a plank with a fetter whose cold touch you will feel on your flesh all
tests/les_miserables.txt:46337:will flee. That is well. You will crawl on your belly through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46339:you will be recaptured. And then you will pass years in a dungeon,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46341:a horrible loaf of darkness which dogs would not touch, eating beans
tests/les_miserables.txt:46343:cellar. Ah! Have pity on yourself, you miserable young child, who were
tests/les_miserables.txt:46344:sucking at nurse less than twenty years ago, and who have, no doubt, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46345:mother still alive! I conjure you, listen to me, I entreat you. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:46346:desire fine black cloth, varnished shoes, to have your hair curled and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46347:sweet-smelling oils on your locks, to please low women, to be handsome.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46348:You will be shaven clean, and you will wear a red blouse and wooden
tests/les_miserables.txt:46349:shoes. You want rings on your fingers, you will have an iron necklet on
tests/les_miserables.txt:46350:your neck. If you glance at a woman, you will receive a blow. And you
tests/les_miserables.txt:46351:will enter there at the age of twenty. And you will come out at fifty!
tests/les_miserables.txt:46353:white teeth, and your handsome, youthful hair; you will come out
tests/les_miserables.txt:46354:broken, bent, wrinkled, toothless, horrible, with white locks! Ah! my
tests/les_miserables.txt:46355:poor child, you are on the wrong road; idleness is counselling you
tests/les_miserables.txt:46357:undertake that painful profession of an idle man. It is not comfortable
tests/les_miserables.txt:46358:to become a rascal. It is less disagreeable to be an honest man. Now
tests/les_miserables.txt:46364:hand; Montparnasse weighed it for a moment, after which he allowed it
tests/les_miserables.txt:46365:to slide gently into the back pocket of his coat, with the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:46366:mechanical precaution as though he had stolen it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46368:All this having been said and done, the goodman turned his back and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46371:“The blockhead!” muttered Montparnasse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46375:Montparnasse watched him with amazement, as he disappeared in the dusk.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46376:This contemplation was fatal to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46378:While the old man was walking away, Gavroche drew near.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46380:Gavroche had assured himself, with a sidelong glance, that Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:46381:Mabeuf was still sitting on his bench, probably sound asleep. Then the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46382:gamin emerged from his thicket, and began to crawl after Montparnasse
tests/les_miserables.txt:46384:came up to Montparnasse without being seen or heard, gently insinuated
tests/les_miserables.txt:46385:his hand into the back pocket of that frock-coat of fine black cloth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46386:seized the purse, withdrew his hand, and having recourse once more to
tests/les_miserables.txt:46387:his crawling, he slipped away like an adder through the shadows.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46389:in thought for the first time in his life, perceived nothing. When
tests/les_miserables.txt:46390:Gavroche had once more attained the point where Father Mabeuf was, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:46392:carry him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46394:The purse fell on Father Mabeuf’s foot. This commotion roused him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46396:He bent over and picked up the purse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46400:The purse had two compartments; in one of them there was some small
tests/les_miserables.txt:46401:change; in the other lay six napoleons.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46418:Cosette’s grief, which had been so poignant and lively four or five
tests/les_miserables.txt:46419:months previously, had, without her being conscious of the fact,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46420:entered upon its convalescence. Nature, spring, youth, love for her
tests/les_miserables.txt:46421:father, the gayety of the birds and flowers, caused something almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:46423:soul, which was so virgin and so young. Was the fire wholly extinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:46431:That same week, she noticed a very handsome officer of lancers, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46432:wasp-like waist, a delicious uniform, the cheeks of a young girl, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46433:sword under his arm, waxed moustaches, and a glazed schapka, passing
tests/les_miserables.txt:46435:face, was vain, insolent and good-looking; quite the reverse of Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46436:He had a cigar in his mouth. Cosette thought that this officer
tests/les_miserables.txt:46437:doubtless belonged to the regiment in barracks in the Rue de Babylone.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46442:From that time forth, was it chance? she saw him pass nearly every day.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46444:The officer’s comrades perceived that there was, in that “badly kept”
tests/les_miserables.txt:46445:garden, behind that malicious rococo fence, a very pretty creature, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:46450:“See here!” they said to him, “there’s a little creature there who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:46454:“Have I the time,” replied the lancer, “to look at all the girls who
tests/les_miserables.txt:46458:This was at the precise moment when Marius was descending heavily
tests/les_miserables.txt:46459:towards agony, and was saying: “If I could but see her before I
tests/les_miserables.txt:46461:gazing at the lancer, he would not have been able to utter a word, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46466:Marius possessed one of those temperaments which bury themselves in
tests/les_miserables.txt:46471:phase of feminine reverie abandoned to itself, in which the isolated
tests/les_miserables.txt:46472:heart of a young girl resembles the tendrils of the vine which cling,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46473:as chance directs, to the capital of a marble column or to the post of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46474:a wine-shop: A rapid and decisive moment, critical for every orphan, be
tests/les_miserables.txt:46475:she rich or poor, for wealth does not prevent a bad choice;
tests/les_miserables.txt:46476:misalliances are made in very high circles, real misalliance is that of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46478:without fortune, is a marble column which bears up a temple of grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:46479:sentiments and grand ideas, so such and such a man of the world
tests/les_miserables.txt:46481:looked at not outside, but inside, a thing which is reserved for his
tests/les_miserables.txt:46482:wife, is nothing more than a block obscurely haunted by violent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46483:unclean, and vinous passions; the post of a drinking-shop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46485:What did Cosette’s soul contain? Passion calmed or lulled to sleep;
tests/les_miserables.txt:46486:something limpid, brilliant, troubled to a certain depth, and gloomy
tests/les_miserables.txt:46487:lower down. The image of the handsome officer was reflected in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46488:surface. Did a souvenir linger in the depths?—Quite at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46491:A singular incident supervened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46502:did he go? No one knew, not even Cosette. Once only, on the occasion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46503:one of these departures, she had accompanied him in a hackney-coach as
tests/les_miserables.txt:46504:far as a little blind-alley at the corner of which she read: _Impasse
tests/les_miserables.txt:46505:de la Planchette_. There he alighted, and the coach took Cosette back
tests/les_miserables.txt:46506:to the Rue de Babylone. It was usually when money was lacking in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46515:sing, accompanying herself the while, the chorus from _Euryanthe_:
tests/les_miserables.txt:46516:“Hunters astray in the wood!” which is probably the most beautiful
tests/les_miserables.txt:46517:thing in all the sphere of music. When she had finished, she remained
tests/les_miserables.txt:46520:All at once, it seemed to her that she heard the sound of footsteps in
tests/les_miserables.txt:46523:It could not be her father, he was absent; it could not be Toussaint,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46524:she was in bed, and it was ten o’clock at night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46526:She stepped to the shutter of the drawing-room, which was closed, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46532:She mounted rapidly to the first floor, to her own chamber, opened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46533:small wicket in her shutter, and peeped into the garden. The moon was
tests/les_miserables.txt:46534:at the full. Everything could be seen as plainly as by day.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46538:She opened the window. The garden was absolutely calm, and all that was
tests/les_miserables.txt:46542:heard a noise. It was a hallucination produced by the melancholy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46543:magnificent chorus of Weber, which lays open before the mind terrified
tests/les_miserables.txt:46544:depths, which trembles before the gaze like a dizzy forest, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:46545:which one hears the crackling of dead branches beneath the uneasy tread
tests/les_miserables.txt:46546:of the huntsmen of whom one catches a glimpse through the twilight.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46556:strolling in the garden. In the midst of the confused thoughts which
tests/les_miserables.txt:46557:occupied her, she fancied that she caught for an instant a sound
tests/les_miserables.txt:46558:similar to that of the preceding evening, as though some one were
tests/les_miserables.txt:46560:she told herself that nothing so closely resembles a step on the grass
tests/les_miserables.txt:46561:as the friction of two branches which have moved from side to side, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46562:she paid no heed to it. Besides, she could see nothing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46564:She emerged from “the thicket”; she had still to cross a small lawn to
tests/les_miserables.txt:46567:The moon, which had just risen behind her, cast Cosette’s shadow in
tests/les_miserables.txt:46568:front of her upon this lawn, as she came out from the shrubbery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46572:Beside her shadow, the moon outlined distinctly upon the turf another
tests/les_miserables.txt:46573:shadow, which was particularly startling and terrible, a shadow which
tests/les_miserables.txt:46577:of the clump of shrubbery, a few paces in the rear of Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46579:She stood for a moment without the power to speak, or cry, or call, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:46582:Then she summoned up all her courage, and turned round resolutely.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46586:She glanced on the ground. The figure had disappeared.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46588:She re-entered the thicket, searched the corners boldly, went as far as
tests/les_miserables.txt:46591:She felt herself absolutely chilled with terror. Was this another
tests/les_miserables.txt:46592:hallucination? What! Two days in succession! One hallucination might
tests/les_miserables.txt:46593:pass, but two hallucinations? The disquieting point about it was, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:46605:“It cannot be anything,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46611:distinctly heard some one walking close to the flight of steps beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:46612:her window. She ran to her little wicket and opened it. In point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46613:fact, there was a man in the garden, with a large club in his hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46614:Just as she was about to scream, the moon lighted up the man’s profile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46619:Jean Valjean passed that night and the two succeeding nights in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46623:later; at one o’clock in the morning, possibly, she heard a loud burst
tests/les_miserables.txt:46624:of laughter and her father’s voice calling her:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:46638:And he pointed out to her on the turf a shadow cast by the moon, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46639:which did indeed, bear considerable resemblance to the spectre of a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:46640:wearing a round hat. It was the shadow produced by a chimney-pipe of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46641:sheet iron, with a hood, which rose above a neighboring roof.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46646:chimney-pots.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46648:Jean Valjean became quite tranquil once more; as for Cosette, she did
tests/les_miserables.txt:46649:not pay much attention to the question whether the chimney-pot was
tests/les_miserables.txt:46650:really in the direction of the shadow which she had seen, or thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:46654:She did not question herself as to the peculiarity of a chimney-pot
tests/les_miserables.txt:46655:which is afraid of being caught in the act, and which retires when some
tests/les_miserables.txt:46659:to be complete, and it quite vanished from her mind, whether there
tests/les_miserables.txt:46660:could possibly be any one walking in the garden during the evening or
tests/les_miserables.txt:46663:A few days later, however, a fresh incident occurred.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46671:In the garden, near the railing on the street, there was a stone bench,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46672:screened from the eyes of the curious by a plantation of yoke-elms, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:46673:which could, in case of necessity, be reached by an arm from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46677:Cosette had seated herself on this bench after sundown. The breeze was
tests/les_miserables.txt:46678:blowing briskly in the trees, Cosette was meditating; an objectless
tests/les_miserables.txt:46679:sadness was taking possession of her little by little, that invincible
tests/les_miserables.txt:46680:sadness evoked by the evening, and which arises, perhaps, who knows,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46681:from the mystery of the tomb which is ajar at that hour.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46686:drenched in dew, and saying to herself, through the species of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46687:melancholy somnambulism in which she was plunged: “Really, one needs
tests/les_miserables.txt:46688:wooden shoes for the garden at this hour. One takes cold.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:46691:She returned to the bench.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46694:which she had quitted, a tolerably large stone which had, evidently,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46697:Cosette gazed at the stone, asking herself what it meant. All at once
tests/les_miserables.txt:46698:the idea occurred to her that the stone had not reached the bench all
tests/les_miserables.txt:46699:by itself, that some one had placed it there, that an arm had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:46702:she did not touch it, fled without glancing behind her, took refuge in
tests/les_miserables.txt:46703:the house, and immediately closed with shutter, bolt, and bar the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46713:[We have already noted once for all the fact that Toussaint stuttered.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46714:May we be permitted to dispense with it for the future. The musical
tests/les_miserables.txt:46717:Jean Valjean, a thoughtful man, and given to nocturnal strolls, often
tests/les_miserables.txt:46720:“Toussaint,” went on Cosette, “are you careful to thoroughly barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:46722:and to put the little iron things in the little rings that close them?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:46725:“Oh! be easy on that score, Miss.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:46729:fact, but she could not refrain from adding:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:46734:“So far as that is concerned,” said Toussaint, “it is true. We might be
tests/les_miserables.txt:46739:your chamber at night and say: ‘Hold your tongue!’ and begin to cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:46740:your throat. It’s not the dying so much; you die, for one must die, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46741:that’s all right; it’s the abomination of feeling those people touch
tests/les_miserables.txt:46742:you. And then, their knives; they can’t be able to cut well with them!
tests/les_miserables.txt:46743:Ah, good gracious!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:46750:possibly, also, by the recollection of the apparitions of the past
tests/les_miserables.txt:46751:week, which recurred to her memory, dared not even say to her: “Go and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46752:look at the stone which has been placed on the bench!” for fear of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46754:all the doors and windows were carefully fastened, made Toussaint go
tests/les_miserables.txt:46755:all over the house from garret to cellar, locked herself up in her own
tests/les_miserables.txt:46756:chamber, bolted her door, looked under her couch, went to bed and slept
tests/les_miserables.txt:46758:and full of caverns.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46761:our terrors of the past night, and our laughter is in direct proportion
tests/les_miserables.txt:46762:to our terror which they have caused,—at sunrise Cosette, when she
tests/les_miserables.txt:46766:chimney-pot! Am I becoming a coward?” The sun, which was glowing
tests/les_miserables.txt:46767:through the crevices in her shutters, and turning the damask curtains
tests/les_miserables.txt:46768:crimson, reassured her to such an extent that everything vanished from
tests/les_miserables.txt:46771:“There was no more a stone on the bench than there was a man in a round
tests/les_miserables.txt:46775:She dressed herself, descended to the garden, ran to the bench, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46776:broke out in a cold perspiration. The stone was there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46778:But this lasted only for a moment. That which is terror by night is
tests/les_miserables.txt:46779:curiosity by day.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46781:“Bah!” said she, “come, let us see what it is.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:46784:She lifted the stone, which was tolerably large. Beneath it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:46785:something which resembled a letter. It was a white envelope. Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:46787:the envelope, though unsealed, was not empty. Papers could be seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:46791:curiosity; it was a beginning of anxiety.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46793:Cosette drew from the envelope its contents, a little notebook of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46794:paper, each page of which was numbered and bore a few lines in a very
tests/les_miserables.txt:46798:To her, probably, since a hand had deposited the packet on her bench.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46799:From whom did it come? An irresistible fascination took possession of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46800:her; she tried to turn away her eyes from the leaflets which were
tests/les_miserables.txt:46801:trembling in her hand, she gazed at the sky, the street, the acacias
tests/les_miserables.txt:46803:and then her glance suddenly fell upon the manuscript, and she said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:46804:herself that she must know what it contained.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46819:The reduction of the universe to a single being, the expansion of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46826:What a void in the absence of the being who, by herself alone fills the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46827:world! Oh! how true it is that the beloved being becomes God. One could
tests/les_miserables.txt:46828:comprehend that God might be jealous of this had not God the Father of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46829:all evidently made creation for the soul, and the soul for love.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46831:The glimpse of a smile beneath a white crape bonnet with a lilac
tests/les_miserables.txt:46832:curtain is sufficient to cause the soul to enter into the palace of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46835:God is behind everything, but everything hides God. Things are black,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46836:creatures are opaque. To love a being is to render that being
tests/les_miserables.txt:46842:Parted lovers beguile absence by a thousand chimerical devices, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:46844:seeing each other, they cannot write to each other; they discover a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46845:multitude of mysterious means to correspond. They send each other the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46846:song of the birds, the perfume of the flowers, the smiles of children,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46848:all creation. And why not? All the works of God are made to serve love.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46849:Love is sufficiently potent to charge all nature with its messages.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46854:that is the only thing that can occupy and fill eternity. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46857:Love participates of the soul itself. It is of the same nature. Like
tests/les_miserables.txt:46858:it, it is the divine spark; like it, it is incorruptible, indivisible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46859:imperishable. It is a point of fire that exists within us, which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:46860:immortal and infinite, which nothing can confine, and which nothing can
tests/les_miserables.txt:46864:Oh Love! Adorations! voluptuousness of two minds which understand each
tests/les_miserables.txt:46865:other, of two hearts which exchange with each other, of two glances
tests/les_miserables.txt:46866:which penetrate each other! You will come to me, will you not, bliss!
tests/les_miserables.txt:46868:sometimes dreamed that from time to time hours detached themselves from
tests/les_miserables.txt:46869:the lives of the angels and came here below to traverse the destinies
tests/les_miserables.txt:46872:God can add nothing to the happiness of those who love, except to give
tests/les_miserables.txt:46874:fact, an augmentation; but to increase in intensity even the ineffable
tests/les_miserables.txt:46875:felicity which love bestows on the soul even in this world, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:46879:You look at a star for two reasons, because it is luminous, and because
tests/les_miserables.txt:46880:it is impenetrable. You have beside you a sweeter radiance and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46883:All of us, whoever we may be, have our respirable beings. We lack air
tests/les_miserables.txt:46884:and we stifle. Then we die. To die for lack of love is horrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46885:Suffocation of the soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46887:When love has fused and mingled two beings in a sacred and angelic
tests/les_miserables.txt:46888:unity, the secret of life has been discovered so far as they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:46889:concerned; they are no longer anything more than the two boundaries of
tests/les_miserables.txt:46895:think of her so intently that she is constrained to think of you.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46897:What love commences can be finished by God alone.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46899:True love is in despair and is enchanted over a glove lost or a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46900:handkerchief found, and eternity is required for its devotion and its
tests/les_miserables.txt:46901:hopes. It is composed both of the infinitely great and the infinitely
tests/les_miserables.txt:46907:Nothing suffices for love. We have happiness, we desire paradise; we
tests/les_miserables.txt:46910:Oh ye who love each other, all this is contained in love. Understand
tests/les_miserables.txt:46911:how to find it there. Love has contemplation as well as heaven, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46914:“Does she still come to the Luxembourg?” “No, sir.” “This is the church
tests/les_miserables.txt:46915:where she attends mass, is it not?” “She no longer comes here.” “Does
tests/les_miserables.txt:46923:What a melancholy thing not to know the address of one’s soul!
tests/les_miserables.txt:46925:Love has its childishness, other passions have their pettinesses. Shame
tests/les_miserables.txt:46926:on the passions which belittle man! Honor to the one which makes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46927:child of him!
tests/les_miserables.txt:46930:is a being who carried off my sky when she went away.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46933:hand, and from time to time, in the darkness, gently caressing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46934:finger,—that would suffice for my eternity!
tests/les_miserables.txt:46936:Ye who suffer because ye love, love yet more. To die of love, is to
tests/les_miserables.txt:46940:There is ecstasy in agony.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46942:Oh joy of the birds! It is because they have nests that they sing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46944:Love is a celestial respiration of the air of paradise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46947:trial, an incomprehensible preparation for an unknown destiny. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:46951:perceive the infinite; the definitive permits itself to be seen only by
tests/les_miserables.txt:46952:the dead. In the meanwhile, love and suffer, hope and contemplate. Woe,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46953:alas! to him who shall have loved only bodies, forms, appearances!
tests/les_miserables.txt:46957:I encountered in the street, a very poor young man who was in love. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:46958:hat was old, his coat was worn, his elbows were in holes; water
tests/les_miserables.txt:46959:trickled through his shoes, and the stars through his soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46962:love! The heart becomes heroic, by dint of passion. It is no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:46963:composed of anything but what is pure; it no longer rests on anything
tests/les_miserables.txt:46964:that is not elevated and great. An unworthy thought can no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:46965:germinate in it, than a nettle on a glacier. The serene and lofty soul,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46966:inaccessible to vulgar passions and emotions, dominating the clouds and
tests/les_miserables.txt:46969:feels anything but profound and subterranean shocks of destiny, as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46970:crests of mountains feel the shocks of earthquake.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46972:If there did not exist some one who loved, the sun would become
tests/les_miserables.txt:46973:extinct.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46983:handsome officer passed triumphantly in front of the gate,—it was his
tests/les_miserables.txt:46986:She resumed her contemplation of the book. It was written in the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:46987:charming of chirography, thought Cosette; in the same hand, but with
tests/les_miserables.txt:46988:divers inks, sometimes very black, again whitish, as when ink has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:46989:added to the inkstand, and consequently on different days. It was,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46990:then, a mind which had unfolded itself there, sigh by sigh,
tests/les_miserables.txt:46991:irregularly, without order, without choice, without object, hap-hazard.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46992:Cosette had never read anything like it. This manuscript, in which she
tests/les_miserables.txt:46993:already perceived more light than obscurity, produced upon her the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46994:effect of a half-open sanctuary. Each one of these mysterious lines
tests/les_miserables.txt:46995:shone before her eyes and inundated her heart with a strange radiance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:46996:The education which she had received had always talked to her of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:46997:soul, and never of love, very much as one might talk of the firebrand
tests/les_miserables.txt:46998:and not of the flame. This manuscript of fifteen pages suddenly and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47002:a passionate, ardent, generous, honest nature, a sacred will, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:47003:immense sorrow, and an immense despair, a suffering heart, an ecstasy
tests/les_miserables.txt:47004:fully expanded. What was this manuscript? A letter. A letter without
tests/les_miserables.txt:47006:disinterested, an enigma composed of truths, a message of love made to
tests/les_miserables.txt:47009:absent one, tranquil and dejected, who seemed ready to take refuge in
tests/les_miserables.txt:47010:death and who sent to the absent love, his lady, the secret of fate,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47012:and one finger in heaven. These lines, which had fallen one by one on
tests/les_miserables.txt:47013:the paper, were what might be called drops of soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47015:Now, from whom could these pages come? Who could have penned them?
tests/les_miserables.txt:47021:Day had dawned once more in her spirit; all had reappeared. She felt an
tests/les_miserables.txt:47030:spark which had fallen from that other soul into hers. She felt the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47031:conflagration starting up once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47033:She imbued herself thoroughly with every word of the manuscript: “Oh
tests/les_miserables.txt:47034:yes!” said she, “how perfectly I recognize all that! That is what I had
tests/les_miserables.txt:47036:Lieutenant Théodule passed the gate once more, and rattled his spurs
tests/les_miserables.txt:47037:upon the pavement. Cosette was forced to raise her eyes. She thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:47039:and extremely ugly. The officer thought it his duty to smile at her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47044:She fled, re-entered the house, and shut herself up in her chamber to
tests/les_miserables.txt:47045:peruse the manuscript once more, to learn it by heart, and to dream.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47049:All was over, Cosette had fallen back into deep, seraphic love. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:47050:abyss of Eden had yawned once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47052:All day long, Cosette remained in a sort of bewilderment. She scarcely
tests/les_miserables.txt:47054:she could not manage to conjecture anything, she hoped through a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47057:her countenance, and shivers ran through her frame. It seemed to her,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47058:at intervals, that she was entering the land of chimæras; she said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:47062:would have shuddered in the presence of that luminous and unknown joy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47063:which overflowed from beneath her eyelids.—“Oh yes!” she thought, “it
tests/les_miserables.txt:47064:is certainly he! This comes from him, and is for me!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47067:And she told herself that an intervention of the angels, a celestial
tests/les_miserables.txt:47068:chance, had given him back to her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47070:Oh transfiguration of love! Oh dreams! That celestial chance, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:47072:to another thief, from the Charlemagne Courtyard to the Lion’s Ditch,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47073:over the roofs of La Force.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47081:When evening came, Jean Valjean went out; Cosette dressed herself. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:47082:arranged her hair in the most becoming manner, and she put on a dress
tests/les_miserables.txt:47083:whose bodice had received one snip of the scissors too much, and which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47085:and was, as young girls say, “a trifle indecent.” It was not in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47086:least indecent, but it was prettier than usual. She made her toilet
tests/les_miserables.txt:47091:Was she expecting a visitor? No.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47094:kitchen, which opened on the back yard.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47096:She began to stroll about under the trees, thrusting aside the branches
tests/les_miserables.txt:47097:from time to time with her hand, because there were some which hung
tests/les_miserables.txt:47100:In this manner she reached the bench.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47105:she wished to caress and thank it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47107:All at once, she experienced that indefinable impression which one
tests/les_miserables.txt:47115:His head was bare. He appeared to have grown thin and pale. His black
tests/les_miserables.txt:47116:clothes were hardly discernible. The twilight threw a wan light on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47117:fine brow, and covered his eyes in shadows. Beneath a veil of
tests/les_miserables.txt:47118:incomparable sweetness, he had something about him that suggested death
tests/les_miserables.txt:47119:and night. His face was illuminated by the light of the dying day, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47124:He had flung away his hat in the thicket, a few paces distant.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47126:Cosette, though ready to swoon, uttered no cry. She retreated slowly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47127:for she felt herself attracted. He did not stir. By virtue of something
tests/les_miserables.txt:47128:ineffable and melancholy which enveloped him, she felt the look in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47129:eyes which she could not see.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47131:Cosette, in her retreat, encountered a tree and leaned against it. Had
tests/les_miserables.txt:47134:Then she heard his voice, that voice which she had really never heard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47137:“Pardon me, here I am. My heart is full. I could not live on as I was
tests/les_miserables.txt:47138:living, and I have come. Have you read what I placed there on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47139:bench? Do you recognize me at all? Have no fear of me. It is a long
tests/les_miserables.txt:47140:time, you remember the day, since you looked at me at the Luxembourg,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47144:chairs, and she told me that she no longer saw you. You lived in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47147:to do? And then you disappeared. I thought I saw you pass once, while I
tests/les_miserables.txt:47148:was reading the newspapers under the arcade of the Odéon. I ran after
tests/les_miserables.txt:47150:came hither. Do not be afraid, no one sees me. I come to gaze upon your
tests/les_miserables.txt:47153:round, I fled. Once, I heard you singing. I was happy. Did it affect
tests/les_miserables.txt:47154:you because I heard you singing through the shutters? That could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:47155:hurt you. No, it is not so? You see, you are my angel! Let me come
tests/les_miserables.txt:47166:close, without knowing what he was doing. He supported her, though he
tests/les_miserables.txt:47169:him that he was accomplishing some religious act, and that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:47170:committing a profanation. Moreover, he had not the least passion for
tests/les_miserables.txt:47171:this lovely woman whose force he felt against his breast. He was beside
tests/les_miserables.txt:47180:She replied in a voice so low that it was no longer anything more than
tests/les_miserables.txt:47186:And she hid her blushing face on the breast of the superb and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47187:intoxicated young man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47189:He fell upon the bench, and she beside him. They had no words more. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:47190:stars were beginning to gleam. How did it come to pass that their lips
tests/les_miserables.txt:47191:met? How comes it to pass that the birds sing, that snow melts, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:47193:the black trees on the shivering crest of the hills?
tests/les_miserables.txt:47199:They felt neither the cool night, nor the cold stone, nor the damp
tests/les_miserables.txt:47200:earth, nor the wet grass; they looked at each other, and their hearts
tests/les_miserables.txt:47201:were full of thoughts. They had clasped hands unconsciously.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47207:From time to time, Marius’ knee touched Cosette’s knee, and both
tests/les_miserables.txt:47213:Little by little they began to talk to each other. Effusion followed
tests/les_miserables.txt:47214:silence, which is fulness. The night was serene and splendid overhead.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47215:These two beings, pure as spirits, told each other everything, their
tests/les_miserables.txt:47216:dreams, their intoxications, their ecstasies, their chimæras, their
tests/les_miserables.txt:47217:weaknesses, how they had adored each other from afar, how they had
tests/les_miserables.txt:47218:longed for each other, their despair when they had ceased to see each
tests/les_miserables.txt:47219:other. They confided to each other in an ideal intimacy, which nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:47220:could augment, their most secret and most mysterious thoughts. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:47221:related to each other, with candid faith in their illusions, all that
tests/les_miserables.txt:47222:love, youth, and the remains of childhood which still lingered about
tests/les_miserables.txt:47224:into each other in such wise, that at the expiration of a quarter of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:47226:girl who had the young man’s soul. Each became permeated with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47227:other, they were enchanted with each other, they dazzled each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47229:When they had finished, when they had told each other everything, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:47252:Since 1823, when the tavern of Montfermeil was on the way to shipwreck
tests/les_miserables.txt:47253:and was being gradually engulfed, not in the abyss of a bankruptcy, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:47254:in the cesspool of petty debts, the Thénardier pair had had two other
tests/les_miserables.txt:47255:children; both males. That made five; two girls and three boys.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47258:young and very small, with remarkable luck.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47261:that woman. A phenomenon, by the way, of which there is more than one
tests/les_miserables.txt:47262:example extant. Like the Maréchale de La Mothe-Houdancourt, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47264:ended. Her hatred of the human race began with her own sons. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47265:direction of her sons her evil disposition was uncompromising, and her
tests/les_miserables.txt:47267:she detested the eldest; she cursed the other two. Why? Because. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:47268:most terrible of motives, the most unanswerable of retorts—Because. “I
tests/les_miserables.txt:47271:Let us explain how the Thénardiers had succeeded in getting rid of
tests/les_miserables.txt:47272:their last two children; and even in drawing profit from the operation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47274:The woman Magnon, who was mentioned a few pages further back, was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47275:same one who had succeeded in making old Gillenormand support the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:47276:children which she had had. She lived on the Quai des Célestins, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47277:corner of this ancient street of the Petit-Musc which afforded her the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47278:opportunity of changing her evil repute into good odor. The reader will
tests/les_miserables.txt:47279:remember the great epidemic of croup which ravaged the river districts
tests/les_miserables.txt:47280:of the Seine in Paris thirty-five years ago, and of which science took
tests/les_miserables.txt:47281:advantage to make experiments on a grand scale as to the efficacy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:47282:inhalations of alum, so beneficially replaced at the present day by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47283:external tincture of iodine. During this epidemic, the Magnon lost both
tests/les_miserables.txt:47285:the evening of the same day. This was a blow. These children were
tests/les_miserables.txt:47286:precious to their mother; they represented eighty francs a month. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:47287:eighty francs were punctually paid in the name of M. Gillenormand, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:47288:collector of his rents, M. Barge, a retired tip-staff, in the Rue du
tests/les_miserables.txt:47289:Roi-de-Sicile. The children dead, the income was at an end. The Magnon
tests/les_miserables.txt:47290:sought an expedient. In that dark free-masonry of evil of which she
tests/les_miserables.txt:47291:formed a part, everything is known, all secrets are kept, and all lend
tests/les_miserables.txt:47292:mutual aid. Magnon needed two children; the Thénardiers had two. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:47294:investment for the other. The little Thénardiers became little Magnons.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47296:Clocheperce. In Paris, the identity which binds an individual to
tests/les_miserables.txt:47299:The registry office being in no way warned, raised no objections, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47300:the substitution was effected in the most simple manner in the world.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47301:Only, the Thénardier exacted for this loan of her children, ten francs
tests/les_miserables.txt:47302:a month, which Magnon promised to pay, and which she actually did pay.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47303:It is unnecessary to add that M. Gillenormand continued to perform his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47304:compact. He came to see the children every six months. He did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:47305:perceive the change. “Monsieur,” Magnon said to him, “how much they
tests/les_miserables.txt:47309:Thénardier, to whom avatars were easy, seized this occasion to become
tests/les_miserables.txt:47310:Jondrette. His two daughters and Gavroche had hardly had time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:47311:discover that they had two little brothers. When a certain degree of
tests/les_miserables.txt:47312:misery is reached, one is overpowered with a sort of spectral
tests/les_miserables.txt:47313:indifference, and one regards human beings as though they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:47314:spectres. Your nearest relations are often no more for you than vague
tests/les_miserables.txt:47315:shadowy forms, barely outlined against a nebulous background of life
tests/les_miserables.txt:47316:and easily confounded again with the invisible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47319:to Magnon, with express intention of renouncing them forever, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47320:Thénardier had felt, or had appeared to feel, a scruple. She said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:47321:her husband: “But this is abandoning our children!” Thénardier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47322:masterful and phlegmatic, cauterized the scruple with this saying:
tests/les_miserables.txt:47323:“Jean Jacques Rousseau did even better!” From scruples, the mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:47324:proceeded to uneasiness: “But what if the police were to annoy us? Tell
tests/les_miserables.txt:47327:blue in it. Besides, no one has any interest in looking closely after
tests/les_miserables.txt:47328:children who have not a sou.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47331:Magnon was a sort of fashionable woman in the sphere of crime. She was
tests/les_miserables.txt:47332:careful about her toilet. She shared her lodgings, which were furnished
tests/les_miserables.txt:47333:in an affected and wretched style, with a clever gallicized English
tests/les_miserables.txt:47334:thief. This English woman, who had become a naturalized Parisienne,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47335:recommended by very wealthy relations, intimately connected with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47336:medals in the Library and Mademoiselle Mar’s diamonds, became
tests/les_miserables.txt:47337:celebrated later on in judicial accounts. She was called _Mamselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:47340:The two little creatures who had fallen to Magnon had no reason to
tests/les_miserables.txt:47341:complain of their lot. Recommended by the eighty francs, they were well
tests/les_miserables.txt:47342:cared for, as is everything from which profit is derived; they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:47343:neither badly clothed, nor badly fed; they were treated almost like
tests/les_miserables.txt:47346:presence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47348:Thus passed several years. Thénardier augured well from the fact. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:47349:day, he chanced to say to Magnon as she handed him his monthly stipend
tests/les_miserables.txt:47350:of ten francs: “The father must give them some education.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47353:All at once, these two poor children, who had up to that time been
tests/les_miserables.txt:47354:protected tolerably well, even by their evil fate, were abruptly hurled
tests/les_miserables.txt:47355:into life and forced to begin it for themselves.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47357:A wholesale arrest of malefactors, like that in the Jondrette garret,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47358:necessarily complicated by investigations and subsequent
tests/les_miserables.txt:47359:incarcerations, is a veritable disaster for that hideous and occult
tests/les_miserables.txt:47360:counter-society which pursues its existence beneath public society; an
tests/les_miserables.txt:47361:adventure of this description entails all sorts of catastrophes in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:47362:sombre world. The Thénardier catastrophe involved the catastrophe of
tests/les_miserables.txt:47366:relating to the Rue Plumet, a sudden raid was made by the police in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47367:Rue Clocheperce; Magnon was seized, as was also Mamselle Miss; and all
tests/les_miserables.txt:47368:the inhabitants of the house, which was of a suspicious character, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:47370:were playing in the back yard, and saw nothing of the raid. When they
tests/les_miserables.txt:47372:house empty. A cobbler opposite called them to him, and delivered to
tests/les_miserables.txt:47373:them a paper which “their mother” had left for them. On this paper
tests/les_miserables.txt:47374:there was an address: _M. Barge, collector of rents, Rue du
tests/les_miserables.txt:47375:Roi-de-Sicile, No_. 8. The proprietor of the stall said to them: “You
tests/les_miserables.txt:47376:cannot live here any longer. Go there. It is nearby. The first street
tests/les_miserables.txt:47380:The children set out, the elder leading the younger, and holding in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47381:hand the paper which was to guide them. It was cold, and his benumbed
tests/les_miserables.txt:47382:little fingers could not close very firmly, and they did not keep a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47383:very good hold on the paper. At the corner of the Rue Clocheperce, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47384:gust of wind tore it from him, and as night was falling, the child was
tests/les_miserables.txt:47396:Spring in Paris is often traversed by harsh and piercing breezes which
tests/les_miserables.txt:47397:do not precisely chill but freeze one; these north winds which sadden
tests/les_miserables.txt:47398:the most beautiful days produce exactly the effect of those puffs of
tests/les_miserables.txt:47399:cold air which enter a warm room through the cracks of a badly fitting
tests/les_miserables.txt:47402:spring of 1832, the epoch when the first great epidemic of this century
tests/les_miserables.txt:47403:broke out in Europe, these north gales were more harsh and piercing
tests/les_miserables.txt:47404:than ever. It was a door even more glacial than that of winter which
tests/les_miserables.txt:47405:was ajar. It was the door of the sepulchre. In these winds one felt the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47406:breath of the cholera.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47408:From a meteorological point of view, these cold winds possessed this
tests/les_miserables.txt:47409:peculiarity, that they did not preclude a strong electric tension.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47410:Frequent storms, accompanied by thunder and lightning, burst forth at
tests/les_miserables.txt:47411:this epoch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47413:One evening, when these gales were blowing rudely, to such a degree
tests/les_miserables.txt:47415:their cloaks, Little Gavroche, who was always shivering gayly under his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47416:rags, was standing as though in ecstasy before a wig-maker’s shop in
tests/les_miserables.txt:47417:the vicinity of the Orme-Saint-Gervais. He was adorned with a woman’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:47418:woollen shawl, picked up no one knows where, and which he had converted
tests/les_miserables.txt:47419:into a neck comforter. Little Gavroche appeared to be engaged in intent
tests/les_miserables.txt:47420:admiration of a wax bride, in a low-necked dress, and crowned with
tests/les_miserables.txt:47423:taking an observation of the shop, in order to discover whether he
tests/les_miserables.txt:47424:could not “prig” from the shop-front a cake of soap, which he would
tests/les_miserables.txt:47425:then proceed to sell for a sou to a “hair-dresser” in the suburbs. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:47426:had often managed to breakfast off of such a roll. He called his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47427:species of work, for which he possessed special aptitude, “shaving
tests/les_miserables.txt:47431:While contemplating the bride, and eyeing the cake of soap, he muttered
tests/les_miserables.txt:47436:No one has ever discovered to what this monologue referred.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47438:Yes, perchance, this monologue had some connection with the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:47439:occasion on which he had dined, three days before, for it was now
tests/les_miserables.txt:47442:The barber in his shop, which was warmed by a good stove, was shaving a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47443:customer and casting a glance from time to time at the enemy, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:47444:freezing and impudent street urchin both of whose hands were in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47445:pockets, but whose mind was evidently unsheathed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47447:While Gavroche was scrutinizing the shop-window and the cakes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:47448:windsor soap, two children of unequal stature, very neatly dressed, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47452:which resembled a groan rather than a prayer. They both spoke at once,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47453:and their words were unintelligible because sobs broke the voice of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47454:younger, and the teeth of the elder were chattering with cold. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:47456:razor, thrust back the elder with his left hand and the younger with
tests/les_miserables.txt:47457:his knee, and slammed his door, saying: “The idea of coming in and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47461:The two children resumed their march in tears. In the meantime, a cloud
tests/les_miserables.txt:47464:Little Gavroche ran after them and accosted them:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47471:“Is that all?” said Gavroche. “A great matter, truly. The idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:47475:And adopting, in addition to his superiority, which was rather
tests/les_miserables.txt:47476:bantering, an accent of tender authority and gentle patronage:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47483:And the two children followed him as they would have followed an
tests/les_miserables.txt:47484:archbishop. They had stopped crying.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47486:Gavroche led them up the Rue Saint-Antoine in the direction of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47489:As Gavroche walked along, he cast an indignant backward glance at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47496:A woman who caught sight of these three marching in a file, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:47497:Gavroche at their head, burst into noisy laughter. This laugh was
tests/les_miserables.txt:47498:wanting in respect towards the group.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47500:“Good day, Mamselle Omnibus,” said Gavroche to her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47502:An instant later, the wig-maker occurred to his mind once more, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:47506:serpent. Barber, I’ll go and fetch a locksmith, and I’ll have a bell
tests/les_miserables.txt:47512:Brocken, and who had a broom in her hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47519:“You scamp!” shouted the furious pedestrian.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47521:Gavroche elevated his nose above his shawl.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47523:“Is Monsieur complaining?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47526:“Of you!” ejaculated the man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47528:“The office is closed,” said Gavroche, “I do not receive any more
tests/les_miserables.txt:47529:complaints.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47532:In the meanwhile, as he went on up the street, he perceived a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47533:beggar-girl, thirteen or fourteen years old, and clad in so short a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47534:gown that her knees were visible, lying thoroughly chilled under a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47535:porte-cochère. The little girl was getting to be too old for such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47536:thing. Growth does play these tricks. The petticoat becomes short at
tests/les_miserables.txt:47537:the moment when nudity becomes indecent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47539:“Poor girl!” said Gavroche. “She hasn’t even trousers. Hold on, take
tests/les_miserables.txt:47543:And unwinding all the comfortable woollen which he had around his neck,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47545:the scarf became a shawl once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47547:The child stared at him in astonishment, and received the shawl in
tests/les_miserables.txt:47548:silence. When a certain stage of distress has been reached in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47552:That done: “Brrr!” said Gavroche, who was shivering more than Saint
tests/les_miserables.txt:47553:Martin, for the latter retained one-half of his cloak.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47555:At this _brrr!_ the downpour of rain, redoubled in its spite, became
tests/les_miserables.txt:47556:furious. The wicked skies punish good deeds.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47558:“Ah, come now!” exclaimed Gavroche, “what’s the meaning of this? It’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:47560:subscription.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47563:And he set out on the march once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47565:“It’s all right,” he resumed, casting a glance at the beggar-girl, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:47566:she coiled up under the shawl, “she’s got a famous peel.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47569:And looking up at the clouds he exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47574:The two children followed close on his heels.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47576:As they were passing one of these heavy grated lattices, which indicate
tests/les_miserables.txt:47577:a baker’s shop, for bread is put behind bars like gold, Gavroche turned
tests/les_miserables.txt:47583:“Monsieur,” replied the elder, “we have had nothing to eat since this
tests/les_miserables.txt:47587:“So you have neither father nor mother?” resumed Gavroche majestically.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47589:“Excuse us, sir, we have a papa and a mamma, but we don’t know where
tests/les_miserables.txt:47593:“Sometimes that’s better than knowing where they are,” said Gavroche,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47596:“We have been wandering about these two hours,” continued the elder,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47597:“we have hunted for things at the corners of the streets, but we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:47601:“I know,” ejaculated Gavroche, “it’s the dogs who eat everything.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47612:they should have no dwelling place!
tests/les_miserables.txt:47614:The elder of the two children, who had almost entirely recovered the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47615:prompt heedlessness of childhood, uttered this exclamation:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47621:“Bosh,” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47626:“Tanflûte!” retorted Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47629:feeling and fumbling in all sorts of nooks which his rags contained.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47632:but which was triumphant, in reality.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47634:“Let us be calm, young ’uns. Here’s supper for three.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47637:And from one of his pockets he drew forth a sou.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47639:Without allowing the two urchins time for amazement, he pushed both of
tests/les_miserables.txt:47641:counter, crying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47643:“Boy! five centimes’ worth of bread.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47649:“In three pieces, my boy!” went on Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47656:And seeing that the baker, after scrutinizing the three customers, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:47657:taken down a black loaf, he thrust his finger far up his nose with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:47658:inhalation as imperious as though he had had a pinch of the great
tests/les_miserables.txt:47659:Frederick’s snuff on the tip of his thumb, and hurled this indignant
tests/les_miserables.txt:47660:apostrophe full in the baker’s face:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47666:interpellation of Gavroche’s to the baker a Russian or a Polish word,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47667:or one of those savage cries which the Yoways and the Botocudos hurl at
tests/les_miserables.txt:47668:each other from bank to bank of a river, athwart the solitudes, are
tests/les_miserables.txt:47669:warned that it is a word which they [our readers] utter every day, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47670:which takes the place of the phrase: “Qu’est-ce que c’est que cela?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47671:The baker understood perfectly, and replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47673:“Well! It’s bread, and very good bread of the second quality.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47676:“You mean _larton brutal_ [black bread]!” retorted Gavroche, calmly and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47677:coldly disdainful. “White bread, boy! white bread [_larton savonné_]!
tests/les_miserables.txt:47681:The baker could not repress a smile, and as he cut the white bread he
tests/les_miserables.txt:47682:surveyed them in a compassionate way which shocked Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47688:All three of them placed end to end would have hardly made a measure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47690:When the bread was cut, the baker threw the sou into his drawer, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47691:Gavroche said to the two children:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47698:Gavroche began to laugh.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47708:At the same time, he held out a piece of bread to each of them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47711:conversation, deserved some special encouragement and ought to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:47718:One piece was smaller than the others; he kept this for himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47720:The poor children, including Gavroche, were famished. As they tore
tests/les_miserables.txt:47721:their bread apart in big mouthfuls, they blocked up the shop of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47724:“Let’s go into the street again,” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47726:They set off once more in the direction of the Bastille.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47729:smallest halted to look at the time on a leaden watch which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:47730:suspended from his neck by a cord.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47732:“Well, he is a very green ’un,” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47734:Then, becoming thoughtful, he muttered between his teeth:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47736:“All the same, if I had charge of the babes I’d lock ’em up better than
tests/les_miserables.txt:47740:Just as they were finishing their morsel of bread, and had reached the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47741:angle of that gloomy Rue des Ballets, at the other end of which the low
tests/les_miserables.txt:47742:and threatening wicket of La Force was visible:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47744:“Hullo, is that you, Gavroche?” said some one.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47746:“Hullo, is that you, Montparnasse?” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47748:A man had just accosted the street urchin, and the man was no other
tests/les_miserables.txt:47749:than Montparnasse in disguise, with blue spectacles, but recognizable
tests/les_miserables.txt:47750:to Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47752:“The bow-wows!” went on Gavroche, “you’ve got a hide the color of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47753:linseed plaster, and blue specs like a doctor. You’re putting on style,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47757:“Hush!” ejaculated Montparnasse, “not so loud.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47760:And he drew Gavroche hastily out of range of the lighted shops.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47762:The two little ones followed mechanically, holding each other by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47765:When they were ensconced under the arch of a porte-cochère, sheltered
tests/les_miserables.txt:47770:“To the Abbey of Ascend-with-Regret,”36 replied Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47780:“Ah!” exclaimed Gavroche, “so her name is Babet.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47783:Montparnasse lowered his voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47794:“I thought he was buckled.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47797:“He has undone the buckle,” replied Montparnasse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47800:day, Babet, having been transferred to La Conciergerie, had made his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47801:escape, by turning to the left instead of to the right in “the police
tests/les_miserables.txt:47802:office.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47805:Gavroche expressed his admiration for this skill.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47807:“What a dentist!” he cried.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47814:Gavroche, as he listened, had seized a cane that Montparnasse held in
tests/les_miserables.txt:47815:his hand, and mechanically pulled at the upper part, and the blade of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47816:dagger made its appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47818:“Ah!” he exclaimed, pushing the dagger back in haste, “you have brought
tests/les_miserables.txt:47824:“The deuce!” resumed Gavroche, “so you’re going to have a bout with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47828:“You can’t tell,” replied Montparnasse with an indifferent air. “It’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:47832:Gavroche persisted:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47841:And abruptly changing the conversation:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47849:“Something happened t’other day. Fancy. I meet a bourgeois. He makes me
tests/les_miserables.txt:47850:a present of a sermon and his purse. I put it in my pocket. A minute
tests/les_miserables.txt:47851:later, I feel in my pocket. There’s nothing there.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47854:“Except the sermon,” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47859:Gavroche pointed to his two protégés, and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47885:“In the elephant,” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47887:Montparnasse, though not naturally inclined to astonishment, could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:47888:restrain an exclamation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47893:“Well, yes, in the elephant!” retorted Gavroche. “Kekçaa?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47896:This is another word of the language which no one writes, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:47899:Kekçaa signifies: _Qu’est que c’est que cela a? _ [What’s the matter
tests/les_miserables.txt:47902:The urchin’s profound remark recalled Montparnasse to calmness and good
tests/les_miserables.txt:47904:Gavroche’s lodging.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47906:“Of course,” said he, “yes, the elephant. Is it comfortable there?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47909:“Very,” said Gavroche. “It’s really bully there. There ain’t any
tests/les_miserables.txt:47925:“And you climb up? Yes, I understand.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47928:“A turn of the hand, cric, crac, and it’s all over, no one there.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47931:After a pause, Gavroche added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47933:“I shall have a ladder for these children.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47938:“Where the devil did you pick up those young ’uns?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47941:Gavroche replied with great simplicity:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:47948:“You recognized me very readily,” he muttered.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47950:He took from his pocket two small objects which were nothing more than
tests/les_miserables.txt:47951:two quills wrapped in cotton, and thrust one up each of his nostrils.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47954:“That changes you,” remarked Gavroche, “you are less homely so, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:47958:Montparnasse was a handsome fellow, but Gavroche was a tease.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47963:The sound of his voice was different also. In a twinkling, Montparnasse
tests/les_miserables.txt:47964:had become unrecognizable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47966:“Oh! Do play Porrichinelle for us!” exclaimed Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:47968:The two children, who had not been listening up to this point, being
tests/les_miserables.txt:47969:occupied themselves in thrusting their fingers up their noses, drew
tests/les_miserables.txt:47975:He laid his hand on Gavroche’s shoulder, and said to him, emphasizing
tests/les_miserables.txt:47981:This odd phrase produced a singular effect on the gamin. He wheeled
tests/les_miserables.txt:47983:attention, and perceived a police sergeant standing with his back to
tests/les_miserables.txt:47984:them a few paces off. Gavroche allowed an: “Ah! good!” to escape him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47988:brats. Supposing that you should need me some night, you can come and
tests/les_miserables.txt:47990:inquire for Monsieur Gavroche.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:47995:And they parted, Montparnasse betaking himself in the direction of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:47996:Grève, and Gavroche towards the Bastille. The little one of five,
tests/les_miserables.txt:47997:dragged along by his brother who was dragged by Gavroche, turned his
tests/les_miserables.txt:47998:head back several times to watch “Porrichinelle” as he went.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48000:The ambiguous phrase by means of which Montparnasse had warned Gavroche
tests/les_miserables.txt:48001:of the presence of the policeman, contained no other talisman than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48002:assonance _dig_ repeated five or six times in different forms. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:48003:syllable, _dig_, uttered alone or artistically mingled with the words
tests/les_miserables.txt:48004:of a phrase, means: “Take care, we can no longer talk freely.” There
tests/les_miserables.txt:48005:was besides, in Montparnasse’s sentence, a literary beauty which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:48006:lost upon Gavroche, that is _mon dogue, ma dague et ma digue_, a slang
tests/les_miserables.txt:48007:expression of the Temple, which signifies my dog, my knife, and my
tests/les_miserables.txt:48008:wife, greatly in vogue among clowns and the red-tails in the great
tests/les_miserables.txt:48009:century when Molière wrote and Callot drew.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48011:Twenty years ago, there was still to be seen in the southwest corner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48012:the Place de la Bastille, near the basin of the canal, excavated in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48013:ancient ditch of the fortress-prison, a singular monument, which has
tests/les_miserables.txt:48014:already been effaced from the memories of Parisians, and which deserved
tests/les_miserables.txt:48015:to leave some trace, for it was the idea of a “member of the Institute,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48016:the General-in-chief of the army of Egypt.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48020:itself, a marvellous sketch, the grandiose skeleton of an idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48021:Napoleon’s, which successive gusts of wind have carried away and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48022:thrown, on each occasion, still further from us, had become historical
tests/les_miserables.txt:48023:and had acquired a certain definiteness which contrasted with its
tests/les_miserables.txt:48024:provisional aspect. It was an elephant forty feet high, constructed of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48025:timber and masonry, bearing on its back a tower which resembled a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48026:house, formerly painted green by some dauber, and now painted black by
tests/les_miserables.txt:48027:heaven, the wind, and time. In this deserted and unprotected corner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48028:the place, the broad brow of the colossus, his trunk, his tusks, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:48029:tower, his enormous crupper, his four feet, like columns produced, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:48031:a sort of symbol of popular force. It was sombre, mysterious, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48033:standing erect beside the invisible spectre of the Bastille.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48035:Few strangers visited this edifice, no passer-by looked at it. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:48036:falling into ruins; every season the plaster which detached itself from
tests/les_miserables.txt:48038:expression ran in elegant dialect, had forgotten it ever since 1814.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48039:There it stood in its corner, melancholy, sick, crumbling, surrounded
tests/les_miserables.txt:48040:by a rotten palisade, soiled continually by drunken coachmen; cracks
tests/les_miserables.txt:48041:meandered athwart its belly, a lath projected from its tail, tall grass
tests/les_miserables.txt:48042:flourished between its legs; and, as the level of the place had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:48043:rising all around it for a space of thirty years, by that slow and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48044:continuous movement which insensibly elevates the soil of large towns,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48046:way beneath it. It was unclean, despised, repulsive, and superb, ugly
tests/les_miserables.txt:48047:in the eyes of the bourgeois, melancholy in the eyes of the thinker.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48048:There was something about it of the dirt which is on the point of being
tests/les_miserables.txt:48049:swept out, and something of the majesty which is on the point of being
tests/les_miserables.txt:48050:decapitated. As we have said, at night, its aspect changed. Night is
tests/les_miserables.txt:48052:descended, the old elephant became transfigured; he assumed a tranquil
tests/les_miserables.txt:48053:and redoubtable appearance in the formidable serenity of the shadows.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48054:Being of the past, he belonged to night; and obscurity was in keeping
tests/les_miserables.txt:48058:assuredly majestic monument, stamped with a sort of magnificent and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48059:savage gravity, has disappeared, and left to reign in peace, a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48060:gigantic stove, ornamented with its pipe, which has replaced the sombre
tests/les_miserables.txt:48061:fortress with its nine towers, very much as the bourgeoisie replaces
tests/les_miserables.txt:48062:the feudal classes. It is quite natural that a stove should be the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48063:symbol of an epoch in which a pot contains power. This epoch will pass
tests/les_miserables.txt:48064:away, people have already begun to understand that, if there can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:48065:force in a boiler, there can be no force except in the brain; in other
tests/les_miserables.txt:48066:words, that which leads and drags on the world, is not locomotives, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:48067:ideas. Harness locomotives to ideas,—that is well done; but do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:48070:At all events, to return to the Place de la Bastille, the architect of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48071:this elephant succeeded in making a grand thing out of plaster; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48072:architect of the stove has succeeded in making a pretty thing out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48075:This stove-pipe, which has been baptized by a sonorous name, and called
tests/les_miserables.txt:48076:the column of July, this monument of a revolution that miscarried, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:48077:still enveloped in 1832, in an immense shirt of woodwork, which we
tests/les_miserables.txt:48078:regret, for our part, and by a vast plank enclosure, which completed
tests/les_miserables.txt:48081:It was towards this corner of the place, dimly lighted by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48082:reflection of a distant street lamp, that the gamin guided his two
tests/les_miserables.txt:48088:tribunals were called upon to judge, under the charge of vagabondage,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48089:and mutilation of a public monument, a child who had been caught asleep
tests/les_miserables.txt:48090:in this very elephant of the Bastille. This fact noted, we proceed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48092:On arriving in the vicinity of the colossus, Gavroche comprehended the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48093:effect which the infinitely great might produce on the infinitely
tests/les_miserables.txt:48096:“Don’t be scared, infants.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48099:Then he entered through a gap in the fence into the elephant’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:48100:enclosure and helped the young ones to clamber through the breach. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:48101:two children, somewhat frightened, followed Gavroche without uttering a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48102:word, and confided themselves to this little Providence in rags which
tests/les_miserables.txt:48105:There, extended along the fence, lay a ladder which by day served the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48106:laborers in the neighboring timber-yard. Gavroche raised it with
tests/les_miserables.txt:48107:remarkable vigor, and placed it against one of the elephant’s forelegs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48108:Near the point where the ladder ended, a sort of black hole in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48109:belly of the colossus could be distinguished.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48111:Gavroche pointed out the ladder and the hole to his guests, and said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:48117:The two little boys exchanged terrified glances.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48119:“You’re afraid, brats!” exclaimed Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48126:He clasped the rough leg of the elephant, and in a twinkling, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:48127:deigning to make use of the ladder, he had reached the aperture. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:48128:entered it as an adder slips through a crevice, and disappeared within,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48129:and an instant later, the two children saw his head, which looked pale,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48131:spectre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48133:“Well!” he exclaimed, “climb up, young ’uns! You’ll see how snug it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:48137:The little fellows nudged each other, the gamin frightened and inspired
tests/les_miserables.txt:48138:them with confidence at one and the same time, and then, it was raining
tests/les_miserables.txt:48140:brother climbing up, and himself left alone between the paws of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:48141:huge beast, felt greatly inclined to cry, but he did not dare.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48143:The elder lad climbed, with uncertain steps, up the rungs of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48144:ladder; Gavroche, in the meanwhile, encouraging him with exclamations
tests/les_miserables.txt:48145:like a fencing-master to his pupils, or a muleteer to his mules.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48151:And when the child was within reach, he seized him suddenly and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48156:The brat had passed through the crack.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48158:“Now,” said Gavroche, “wait for me. Be so good as to take a seat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48164:feet in the grass, grasped the child of five round the body, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48165:planted him fairly in the middle of the ladder, then he began to climb
tests/les_miserables.txt:48172:thrust, stuffed into the hole, before he had time to recover himself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48173:and Gavroche, entering behind him, and repulsing the ladder with a kick
tests/les_miserables.txt:48174:which sent it flat on the grass, began to clap his hands and to cry:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48184:Gavroche was at home, in fact.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48187:Goodness of giants! This huge monument, which had embodied an idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48188:the Emperor’s, had become the box of a street urchin. The brat had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:48189:accepted and sheltered by the colossus. The bourgeois decked out in
tests/les_miserables.txt:48191:of saying as they scanned it disdainfully with their prominent eyes:
tests/les_miserables.txt:48192:“What’s the good of that?” It served to save from the cold, the frost,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48194:from slumber in the mud which produces fever, and from slumber in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48195:snow which produces death, a little being who had no father, no mother,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48196:no bread, no clothes, no refuge. It served to receive the innocent whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:48197:society repulsed. It served to diminish public crime. It was a lair
tests/les_miserables.txt:48199:miserable old mastodon, invaded by vermin and oblivion, covered with
tests/les_miserables.txt:48200:warts, with mould, and ulcers, tottering, worm-eaten, abandoned,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48201:condemned, a sort of mendicant colossus, asking alms in vain with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48202:benevolent look in the midst of the crossroads, had taken pity on that
tests/les_miserables.txt:48203:other mendicant, the poor pygmy, who roamed without shoes to his feet,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48204:without a roof over his head, blowing on his fingers, clad in rags, fed
tests/les_miserables.txt:48205:on rejected scraps. That was what the elephant of the Bastille was good
tests/les_miserables.txt:48206:for. This idea of Napoleon, disdained by men, had been taken back by
tests/les_miserables.txt:48207:God. That which had been merely illustrious, had become august. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:48209:brass, iron, gold, marble; the old collection of planks, beams and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48210:plaster sufficed for God. The Emperor had had the dream of a genius; in
tests/les_miserables.txt:48211:that Titanic elephant, armed, prodigious, with trunk uplifted, bearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:48212:its tower and scattering on all sides its merry and vivifying waters,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48213:he wished to incarnate the people. God had done a grander thing with
tests/les_miserables.txt:48214:it, he had lodged a child there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48216:The hole through which Gavroche had entered was a breach which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:48217:hardly visible from the outside, being concealed, as we have stated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48218:beneath the elephant’s belly, and so narrow that it was only cats and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48219:homeless children who could pass through it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48221:“Let’s begin,” said Gavroche, “by telling the porter that we are not at
tests/les_miserables.txt:48225:And plunging into the darkness with the assurance of a person who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:48226:well acquainted with his apartments, he took a plank and stopped up the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48229:Again Gavroche plunged into the obscurity. The children heard the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48230:crackling of the match thrust into the phosphoric bottle. The chemical
tests/les_miserables.txt:48231:match was not yet in existence; at that epoch the Fumade steel
tests/les_miserables.txt:48234:A sudden light made them blink; Gavroche had just managed to ignite one
tests/les_miserables.txt:48235:of those bits of cord dipped in resin which are called _cellar rats_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48236:The _cellar rat_, which emitted more smoke than light, rendered the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48237:interior of the elephant confusedly visible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48239:Gavroche’s two guests glanced about them, and the sensation which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:48240:experienced was something like that which one would feel if shut up in
tests/les_miserables.txt:48242:have felt in the biblical belly of the whale. An entire and gigantic
tests/les_miserables.txt:48243:skeleton appeared enveloping them. Above, a long brown beam, whence
tests/les_miserables.txt:48244:started at regular distances, massive, arching ribs, represented the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48245:vertebral column with its sides, stalactites of plaster depended from
tests/les_miserables.txt:48246:them like entrails, and vast spiders’ webs stretching from side to
tests/les_miserables.txt:48247:side, formed dirty diaphragms. Here and there, in the corners, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:48248:visible large blackish spots which had the appearance of being alive,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48249:and which changed places rapidly with an abrupt and frightened
tests/les_miserables.txt:48252:Fragments which had fallen from the elephant’s back into his belly had
tests/les_miserables.txt:48253:filled up the cavity, so that it was possible to walk upon it as on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48256:The smaller child nestled up against his brother, and whispered to
tests/les_miserables.txt:48259:“It’s black.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48262:This remark drew an exclamation from Gavroche. The petrified air of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48263:two brats rendered some shock necessary.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48265:“What’s that you are gabbling about there?” he exclaimed. “Are you
tests/les_miserables.txt:48266:scoffing at me? Are you turning up your noses? Do you want the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48268:the regiment of simpletons. Ah, come now, are you brats from the Pope’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:48272:A little roughness is good in cases of fear. It is reassuring. The two
tests/les_miserables.txt:48273:children drew close to Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48275:Gavroche, paternally touched by this confidence, passed from grave to
tests/les_miserables.txt:48278:“Stupid,” said he, accenting the insulting word, with a caressing
tests/les_miserables.txt:48279:intonation, “it’s outside that it is black. Outside it’s raining, here
tests/les_miserables.txt:48280:it does not rain; outside it’s cold, here there’s not an atom of wind;
tests/les_miserables.txt:48282:ain’t even the moon, here there’s my candle, confound it!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48285:The two children began to look upon the apartment with less terror; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:48286:Gavroche allowed them no more time for contemplation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48288:“Quick,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48290:And he pushed them towards what we are very glad to be able to call the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48295:Gavroche’s bed was complete; that is to say, it had a mattress, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48296:blanket, and an alcove with curtains.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48299:woollen stuff, very warm and almost new. This is what the alcove
tests/les_miserables.txt:48300:consisted of:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48302:Three rather long poles, thrust into and consolidated, with the rubbish
tests/les_miserables.txt:48303:which formed the floor, that is to say, the belly of the elephant, two
tests/les_miserables.txt:48305:to form a pyramidal bundle. This cluster supported a trellis-work of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48306:brass wire which was simply placed upon it, but artistically applied,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48309:so that nothing could pass under it. This grating was nothing else than
tests/les_miserables.txt:48310:a piece of the brass screens with which aviaries are covered in
tests/les_miserables.txt:48311:menageries. Gavroche’s bed stood as in a cage, behind this net. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:48314:This trellis-work took the place of curtains.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48316:Gavroche moved aside the stones which fastened the net down in front,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48317:and the two folds of the net which lapped over each other fell apart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48319:“Down on all fours, brats!” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48321:He made his guests enter the cage with great precaution, then he
tests/les_miserables.txt:48322:crawled in after them, pulled the stones together, and closed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48323:opening hermetically again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48325:All three had stretched out on the mat. Gavroche still had the _cellar
tests/les_miserables.txt:48328:“Now,” said he, “go to sleep! I’m going to suppress the candelabra.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48331:“Monsieur,” the elder of the brothers asked Gavroche, pointing to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48335:“That,” answered Gavroche gravely, “is for the rats. Go to sleep!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48338:Nevertheless, he felt obliged to add a few words of instruction for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48339:benefit of these young creatures, and he continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48341:“It’s a thing from the Jardin des Plantes. It’s used for fierce
tests/les_miserables.txt:48343:to climb over a wall, crawl through a window, and pass through a door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48344:You can get as much as you want.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48353:Gavroche cast a pleased eye on the blanket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48359:And, pointing out to the eldest the mat on which he was lying, a very
tests/les_miserables.txt:48360:thick and admirably made mat, he added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48373:“You crawl over the walls and you don’t care a straw for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48377:The two children gazed with timid and stupefied respect on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:48381:physiognomy was composed of all the grimaces of an old mountebank,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48382:mingled with the most ingenuous and charming smiles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48385:police, then?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48388:Gavroche contented himself with replying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48390:“Brat! Nobody says ‘police,’ they say ‘bobbies.’”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48394:the edge of the mat, the elder being in the middle, Gavroche tucked the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48396:under his head with old rags, in such a way as to form a pillow for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48397:child. Then he turned to the elder:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48399:“Hey! We’re jolly comfortable here, ain’t we?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48402:“Ah, yes!” replied the elder, gazing at Gavroche with the expression of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48405:The two poor little children who had been soaked through, began to grow
tests/les_miserables.txt:48406:warm once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48408:“Ah, by the way,” continued Gavroche, “what were you bawling about?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48414:fellow like you crying! It’s idiotic; you looked like a calf.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48417:“Gracious,” replied the child, “we have no lodging.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48420:“Bother!” retorted Gavroche, “you don’t say ‘lodgings,’ you say
tests/les_miserables.txt:48421:‘crib.’”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48430:“Thank you, sir,” said the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48432:“Listen,” went on Gavroche, “you must never bawl again over anything.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48433:I’ll take care of you. You shall see what fun we’ll have. In summer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48434:we’ll go to the Glacière with Navet, one of my pals, we’ll bathe in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48436:Austerlitz,—that makes the laundresses raging. They scream, they get
tests/les_miserables.txt:48437:mad, and if you only knew how ridiculous they are! We’ll go and see the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48439:Frédérick Lemaître. I have tickets, I know some of the actors, I even
tests/les_miserables.txt:48440:played in a piece once. There were a lot of us fellers, and we ran
tests/les_miserables.txt:48441:under a cloth, and that made the sea. I’ll get you an engagement at my
tests/les_miserables.txt:48443:ain’t. They wear pink tights that go all in wrinkles, and you can see
tests/les_miserables.txt:48445:Opera. We’ll get in with the hired applauders. The Opera claque is well
tests/les_miserables.txt:48446:managed. I wouldn’t associate with the claque on the boulevard. At the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48447:Opera, just fancy! some of them pay twenty sous, but they’re ninnies.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48448:They’re called dishclouts. And then we’ll go to see the guillotine
tests/les_miserables.txt:48449:work. I’ll show you the executioner. He lives in the Rue des Marais.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48454:At that moment a drop of wax fell on Gavroche’s finger, and recalled
tests/les_miserables.txt:48457:“The deuce!” said he, “there’s the wick giving out. Attention! I can’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:48459:he must sleep. We haven’t the time to read M. Paul de Kock’s romances.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48460:And besides, the light might pass through the cracks of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48461:porte-cochère, and all the bobbies need to do is to see it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48465:Gavroche, and reply to him, “a spark might fall in the straw, and we
tests/les_miserables.txt:48469:“People don’t say ‘burn the house down,’” remarked Gavroche, “they say
tests/les_miserables.txt:48470:‘blaze the crib.’”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48473:The storm increased in violence, and the heavy downpour beat upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48474:back of the colossus amid claps of thunder. “You’re taken in, rain!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48475:said Gavroche. “It amuses me to hear the decanter run down the legs of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48476:the house. Winter is a stupid; it wastes its merchandise, it loses its
tests/les_miserables.txt:48477:labor, it can’t wet us, and that makes it kick up a row, old
tests/les_miserables.txt:48478:water-carrier that it is.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48481:This allusion to the thunder, all the consequences of which Gavroche,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48482:in his character of a philosopher of the nineteenth century, accepted,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48484:it entered the belly of the elephant through the crack. Almost at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48486:creatures uttered a shriek, and started up so eagerly that the network
tests/les_miserables.txt:48487:came near being displaced, but Gavroche turned his bold face to them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48488:and took advantage of the clap of thunder to burst into a laugh.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48490:“Calm down, children. Don’t topple over the edifice. That’s fine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48491:first-class thunder; all right. That’s no slouch of a streak of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48492:lightning. Bravo for the good God! Deuce take it! It’s almost as good
tests/les_miserables.txt:48496:That said, he restored order in the netting, pushed the two children
tests/les_miserables.txt:48497:gently down on the bed, pressed their knees, in order to stretch them
tests/les_miserables.txt:48498:out at full length, and exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48500:“Since the good God is lighting his candle, I can blow out mine. Now,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48503:fashionable society, stink in the gullet. Wrap yourself up well in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48511:“People don’t say ‘head,’” cried Gavroche, “they say ‘nut’.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48514:The two children nestled close to each other, Gavroche finished
tests/les_miserables.txt:48516:repeated, for the third time, his injunction in the hieratical tongue:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48523:Hardly had the light been extinguished, when a peculiar trembling began
tests/les_miserables.txt:48524:to affect the netting under which the three children lay.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48526:It consisted of a multitude of dull scratches which produced a metallic
tests/les_miserables.txt:48527:sound, as if claws and teeth were gnawing at the copper wire. This was
tests/les_miserables.txt:48528:accompanied by all sorts of little piercing cries.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48531:chilled with terror, jogged his brother’s elbow; but the elder brother
tests/les_miserables.txt:48532:had already shut his peepers, as Gavroche had ordered. Then the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:48533:one, who could no longer control his terror, questioned Gavroche, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:48539:“Hey?” said Gavroche, who had just closed his eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48544:“It’s the rats,” replied Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48548:The rats, in fact, who swarmed by thousands in the carcass of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48549:elephant, and who were the living black spots which we have already
tests/les_miserables.txt:48550:mentioned, had been held in awe by the flame of the candle, so long as
tests/les_miserables.txt:48551:it had been lighted; but as soon as the cavern, which was the same as
tests/les_miserables.txt:48552:their city, had returned to darkness, scenting what the good
tests/les_miserables.txt:48553:story-teller Perrault calls “fresh meat,” they had hurled themselves in
tests/les_miserables.txt:48554:throngs on Gavroche’s tent, had climbed to the top of it, and had begun
tests/les_miserables.txt:48555:to bite the meshes as though seeking to pierce this new-fangled trap.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48557:Still the little one could not sleep.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48561:“Hey?” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48566:“They are mice.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48569:This explanation reassured the child a little. He had seen white mice
tests/les_miserables.txt:48570:in the course of his life, and he was not afraid of them. Nevertheless,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48571:he lifted up his voice once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48576:“Hey?” said Gavroche again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48578:“Why don’t you have a cat?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48581:“I did have one,” replied Gavroche, “I brought one here, but they ate
tests/les_miserables.txt:48585:This second explanation undid the work of the first, and the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:48588:The dialogue between him and Gavroche began again for the fourth time:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48599:“The cat.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48602:“And who ate the cat?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48608:“The mice?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48614:The child, in consternation, dismayed at the thought of mice which ate
tests/les_miserables.txt:48615:cats, pursued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48617:“Sir, would those mice eat us?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48620:“Wouldn’t they just!” ejaculated Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48622:The child’s terror had reached its climax. But Gavroche added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48624:“Don’t be afraid. They can’t get in. And besides, I’m here! Here, catch
tests/les_miserables.txt:48628:At the same time Gavroche grasped the little fellow’s hand across his
tests/les_miserables.txt:48629:brother. The child pressed the hand close to him, and felt reassured.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48630:Courage and strength have these mysterious ways of communicating
tests/les_miserables.txt:48631:themselves. Silence reigned round them once more, the sound of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:48632:voices had frightened off the rats; at the expiration of a few minutes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48633:they came raging back, but in vain, the three little fellows were fast
tests/les_miserables.txt:48636:The hours of the night fled away. Darkness covered the vast Place de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:48637:Bastille. A wintry gale, which mingled with the rain, blew in gusts,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48638:the patrol searched all the doorways, alleys, enclosures, and obscure
tests/les_miserables.txt:48639:nooks, and in their search for nocturnal vagabonds they passed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:48640:silence before the elephant; the monster, erect, motionless, staring
tests/les_miserables.txt:48641:open-eyed into the shadows, had the appearance of dreaming happily over
tests/les_miserables.txt:48643:sleeping children.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48646:remember, that, at that epoch, the Bastille guard-house was situated at
tests/les_miserables.txt:48647:the other end of the square, and that what took place in the vicinity
tests/les_miserables.txt:48648:of the elephant could neither be seen nor heard by the sentinel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48650:Towards the end of that hour which immediately precedes the dawn, a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:48651:turned from the Rue Saint-Antoine at a run, made the circuit of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48652:enclosure of the column of July, and glided between the palings until
tests/les_miserables.txt:48655:manner in which he was soaked that he had passed the night in the rain.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48656:Arrived beneath the elephant, he uttered a peculiar cry, which did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:48657:belong to any human tongue, and which a paroquet alone could have
tests/les_miserables.txt:48658:imitated. Twice he repeated this cry, of whose orthography the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48659:following barely conveys an idea:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48664:At the second cry, a clear, young, merry voice responded from the belly
tests/les_miserables.txt:48670:Almost immediately, the plank which closed the hole was drawn aside,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48671:and gave passage to a child who descended the elephant’s leg, and fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:48672:briskly near the man. It was Gavroche. The man was Montparnasse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48674:As for his cry of _Kirikikiou_,—that was, doubtless, what the child had
tests/les_miserables.txt:48677:“You will ask for Monsieur Gavroche.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:48680:On hearing it, he had waked with a start, had crawled out of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:48681:“alcove,” pushing apart the netting a little, and carefully drawing it
tests/les_miserables.txt:48682:together again, then he had opened the trap, and descended.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48684:The man and the child recognized each other silently amid the gloom:
tests/les_miserables.txt:48685:Montparnasse confined himself to the remark:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48694:And both took their way towards the Rue Saint-Antoine, whence
tests/les_miserables.txt:48696:market-gardeners’ carts which descend towards the markets at that hour.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48698:The market-gardeners, crouching, half-asleep, in their wagons, amid the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48700:on account of the beating rain, did not even glance at these strange
tests/les_miserables.txt:48709:This is what had taken place that same night at the La Force:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:48711:An escape had been planned between Babet, Brujon, Guelemer, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48712:Thénardier, although Thénardier was in close confinement. Babet had
tests/les_miserables.txt:48714:has seen from Montparnasse’s account to Gavroche. Montparnasse was to
tests/les_miserables.txt:48717:Brujon, after having passed a month in the punishment cell, had had
tests/les_miserables.txt:48718:time, in the first place, to weave a rope, in the second, to mature a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48719:plan. In former times, those severe places where the discipline of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48720:prison delivers the convict into his own hands, were composed of four
tests/les_miserables.txt:48721:stone walls, a stone ceiling, a flagged pavement, a camp bed, a grated
tests/les_miserables.txt:48722:window, and a door lined with iron, and were called _dungeons_; but the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48723:dungeon was judged to be too terrible; nowadays they are composed of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:48724:iron door, a grated window, a camp bed, a flagged pavement, four stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:48725:walls, and a stone ceiling, and are called _chambers of punishment_. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:48726:little light penetrates towards midday. The inconvenient point about
tests/les_miserables.txt:48727:these chambers which, as the reader sees, are not dungeons, is that
tests/les_miserables.txt:48730:So Brujon meditated, and he emerged from the chamber of punishment with
tests/les_miserables.txt:48732:courtyard, he was placed in the New Building. The first thing he found
tests/les_miserables.txt:48733:in the New Building was Guelemer, the second was a nail; Guelemer, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:48734:is to say, crime; a nail, that is to say, liberty. Brujon, of whom it
tests/les_miserables.txt:48735:is high time that the reader should have a complete idea, was, with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:48736:appearance of delicate health and a profoundly premeditated languor, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48737:polished, intelligent sprig, and a thief, who had a caressing glance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48738:and an atrocious smile. His glance resulted from his will, and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:48739:smile from his nature. His first studies in his art had been directed
tests/les_miserables.txt:48742:process called _double pickings_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48744:The circumstance which put the finishing touch on the moment peculiarly
tests/les_miserables.txt:48745:favorable for an attempt at escape, was that the roofers were re-laying
tests/les_miserables.txt:48747:prison. The Saint-Bernard courtyard was no longer absolutely isolated
tests/les_miserables.txt:48748:from the Charlemagne and the Saint-Louis courts. Up above there were
tests/les_miserables.txt:48749:scaffoldings and ladders; in other words, bridges and stairs in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48750:direction of liberty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48752:The New Building, which was the most cracked and decrepit thing to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:48754:were eaten by saltpetre to such an extent that the authorities had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:48756:because stones were in the habit of becoming detached and falling on
tests/les_miserables.txt:48758:authorities committed the error of confining in the New Building the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48759:most troublesome prisoners, of placing there “the hard cases,” as they
tests/les_miserables.txt:48760:say in prison parlance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48762:The New Building contained four dormitories, one above the other, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48763:top story which was called the Bel-Air (Fine-Air). A large
tests/les_miserables.txt:48764:chimney-flue, probably from some ancient kitchen of the Dukes de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:48765:Force, started from the ground floor, traversed all four stories, cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:48767:portions, and finally pierced the roof.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48769:Guelemer and Brujon were in the same dormitory. They had been placed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48770:by way of precaution, on the lower story. Chance ordained that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48771:heads of their beds should rest against the chimney.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48773:Thénardier was directly over their heads in the top story known as
tests/les_miserables.txt:48775:after passing the barracks of the firemen, in front of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48776:porte-cochère of the bathing establishment, beholds a yard full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48777:flowers and shrubs in wooden boxes, at the extremity of which spreads
tests/les_miserables.txt:48779:shutters, the bucolic dream of Jean Jacques.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48782:black, hideous, bare wall by which it was backed up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48784:This was the outer wall of La Force.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48788:Lofty as it was, this wall was overtopped by a still blacker roof,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48789:which could be seen beyond. This was the roof of the New Building.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48790:There one could descry four dormer-windows, guarded with bars; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:48793:A chimney pierced the roof; this was the chimney which traversed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48798:doors of sheet iron, which were studded with enormous bolts. When one
tests/les_miserables.txt:48800:dormer-windows, on one’s right, facing the windows, at regular
tests/les_miserables.txt:48801:intervals, four square, tolerably vast cages, separated by narrow
tests/les_miserables.txt:48805:Thénardier had been in solitary confinement in one of these cages since
tests/les_miserables.txt:48806:the night of the 3d of February. No one was ever able to discover how,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48807:and by what connivance, he succeeded in procuring, and secreting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48808:bottle of wine, invented, so it is said, by Desrues, with which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48809:narcotic is mixed, and which the band of the _Endormeurs_, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:48810:_Sleep-compellers_, rendered famous.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48812:There are, in many prisons, treacherous employees, half-jailers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48813:half-thieves, who assist in escapes, who sell to the police an
tests/les_miserables.txt:48814:unfaithful service, and who turn a penny whenever they can.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48816:On that same night, then, when Little Gavroche picked up the two lost
tests/les_miserables.txt:48817:children, Brujon and Guelemer, who knew that Babet, who had escaped
tests/les_miserables.txt:48819:Montparnasse, rose softly, and with the nail which Brujon had found,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48820:began to pierce the chimney against which their beds stood. The rubbish
tests/les_miserables.txt:48822:thunder shook the doors on their hinges, and created in the prison a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48825:own devices. Brujon was adroit; Guelemer was vigorous. Before any sound
tests/les_miserables.txt:48826:had reached the watcher, who was sleeping in the grated cell which
tests/les_miserables.txt:48827:opened into the dormitory, the wall had been pierced, the chimney
tests/les_miserables.txt:48828:scaled, the iron grating which barred the upper orifice of the flue
tests/les_miserables.txt:48829:forced, and the two redoubtable ruffians were on the roof. The wind and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48835:surrounding wall. At the bottom of this abyss, they could see the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48837:of the rope which Brujon had spun in his dungeon to the stumps of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48838:iron bars which they had just wrenched off, flung the other over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48839:outer wall, crossed the abyss at one bound, clung to the coping of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48841:along the rope, upon a little roof which touches the bath-house, pulled
tests/les_miserables.txt:48842:their rope after them, jumped down into the courtyard of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48843:bath-house, traversed it, pushed open the porter’s wicket, beside which
tests/les_miserables.txt:48844:hung his rope, pulled this, opened the porte-cochère, and found
tests/les_miserables.txt:48847:Three-quarters of an hour had not elapsed since they had risen in bed
tests/les_miserables.txt:48848:in the dark, nail in hand, and their project in their heads.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48854:remained attached to the chimney on the roof. They had sustained no
tests/les_miserables.txt:48855:other damage, however, than that of scratching nearly all the skin off
tests/les_miserables.txt:48861:Towards one o’clock in the morning, the night being very dark, he saw
tests/les_miserables.txt:48863:the dormer-window which was opposite his cage. One halted at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48864:window, long enough to dart in a glance. This was Brujon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48866:Thénardier recognized him, and understood. This was enough.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48868:Thénardier, rated as a burglar, and detained as a measure of precaution
tests/les_miserables.txt:48869:under the charge of organizing a nocturnal ambush, with armed force,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48871:marched up and down in front of his cage with loaded musket. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:48873:fetters weighing fifty pounds. Every day, at four o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48874:afternoon, a jailer, escorted by two dogs,—this was still in vogue at
tests/les_miserables.txt:48875:that time,—entered his cage, deposited beside his bed a loaf of black
tests/les_miserables.txt:48877:thin bouillon, in which swam a few Mayagan beans, inspected his irons
tests/les_miserables.txt:48881:Thénardier had obtained permission to keep a sort of iron bolt which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:48882:used to spike his bread into a crack in the wall, “in order to preserve
tests/les_miserables.txt:48884:objection had been made to this spike. Still, it was remembered
tests/les_miserables.txt:48889:At two o’clock in the morning, the sentinel, who was an old soldier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48890:was relieved, and replaced by a conscript. A few moments later, the man
tests/les_miserables.txt:48891:with the dogs paid his visit, and went off without noticing anything,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48892:except, possibly, the excessive youth and “the rustic air” of the “raw
tests/les_miserables.txt:48893:recruit.” Two hours afterwards, at four o’clock, when they came to
tests/les_miserables.txt:48894:relieve the conscript, he was found asleep on the floor, lying like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48895:log near Thénardier’s cage. As for Thénardier, he was no longer there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48896:There was a hole in the ceiling of his cage, and, above it, another
tests/les_miserables.txt:48897:hole in the roof. One of the planks of his bed had been wrenched off,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48898:and probably carried away with him, as it was not found. They also
tests/les_miserables.txt:48899:seized in his cell a half-empty bottle which contained the remains of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48900:the stupefying wine with which the soldier had been drugged. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:48903:At the moment when this discovery was made, it was assumed that
tests/les_miserables.txt:48904:Thénardier was out of reach. The truth is, that he was no longer in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48907:Thénardier, on reaching the roof of the New Building, had found the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48909:chimney, but, as this broken fragment was much too short, he had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:48910:been able to escape by the outer wall, as Brujon and Guelemer had done.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48912:When one turns from the Rue des Ballets into the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48913:one almost immediately encounters a repulsive ruin. There stood on that
tests/les_miserables.txt:48914:spot, in the last century, a house of which only the back wall now
tests/les_miserables.txt:48915:remains, a regular wall of masonry, which rises to the height of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48916:third story between the adjoining buildings. This ruin can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:48917:recognized by two large square windows which are still to be seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:48920:formerly visible a lofty and lugubrious wall, which was a fragment of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48921:the outer wall of La Force.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48923:The empty space on the street left by the demolished house is
tests/les_miserables.txt:48924:half-filled by a fence of rotten boards, shored up by five stone posts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48925:In this recess lies concealed a little shanty which leans against the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48926:portion of the ruin which has remained standing. The fence has a gate,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48927:which, a few years ago, was fastened only by a latch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48929:It was the crest of this ruin that Thénardier had succeeded in
tests/les_miserables.txt:48930:reaching, a little after one o’clock in the morning.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48934:helped him. Had he made use of the ladders and scaffoldings of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48935:slaters to get from roof to roof, from enclosure to enclosure, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:48936:compartment to compartment, to the buildings of the Charlemagne court,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48937:then to the buildings of the Saint-Louis court, to the outer wall, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48938:thence to the hut on the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile? But in that itinerary
tests/les_miserables.txt:48939:there existed breaks which seemed to render it an impossibility. Had he
tests/les_miserables.txt:48940:placed the plank from his bed like a bridge from the roof of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48941:Fine-Air to the outer wall, and crawled flat, on his belly on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48942:coping of the outer wall the whole distance round the prison as far as
tests/les_miserables.txt:48943:the hut? But the outer wall of La Force formed a crenellated and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48944:unequal line; it mounted and descended, it dropped at the firemen’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:48945:barracks, it rose towards the bath-house, it was cut in twain by
tests/les_miserables.txt:48947:on the Rue Pavée; everywhere occurred falls and right angles; and then,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48948:the sentinels must have espied the dark form of the fugitive; hence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48949:the route taken by Thénardier still remains rather inexplicable. In two
tests/les_miserables.txt:48951:thirst for liberty which changes precipices into ditches, iron bars
tests/les_miserables.txt:48953:a bird, stupidity into instinct, instinct into intelligence, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48954:intelligence into genius, had Thénardier invented a third mode? No one
tests/les_miserables.txt:48957:The marvels of escape cannot always be accounted for. The man who makes
tests/les_miserables.txt:48958:his escape, we repeat, is inspired; there is something of the star and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48960:deliverance is no less surprising than the flight towards the sublime,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48961:and one says of the escaped thief: “How did he contrive to scale that
tests/les_miserables.txt:48966:At all events, dripping with perspiration, drenched with rain, with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:48967:clothes hanging in ribbons, his hands flayed, his elbows bleeding, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:48968:knees torn, Thénardier had reached what children, in their figurative
tests/les_miserables.txt:48969:language, call _the edge_ of the wall of the ruin, there he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:48970:stretched himself out at full length, and there his strength had failed
tests/les_miserables.txt:48971:him. A steep escarpment three stories high separated him from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48974:The rope which he had was too short.
tests/les_miserables.txt:48976:There he waited, pale, exhausted, desperate with all the despair which
tests/les_miserables.txt:48979:neighboring clock of Saint-Paul strike four within a few minutes, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:48981:asleep under the pierced roof, staring in horror at a terrible depth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48982:at the light of the street lanterns, the wet, black pavement, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:48983:pavement longed for yet frightful, which meant death, and which meant
tests/les_miserables.txt:48986:He asked himself whether his three accomplices in flight had succeeded,
tests/les_miserables.txt:48987:if they had heard him, and if they would come to his assistance. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:48988:listened. With the exception of the patrol, no one had passed through
tests/les_miserables.txt:48989:the street since he had been there. Nearly the whole of the descent of
tests/les_miserables.txt:48990:the market-gardeners from Montreuil, from Charonne, from Vincennes, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:48991:from Bercy to the markets was accomplished through the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:48994:Four o’clock struck. Thénardier shuddered. A few moments later, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:48995:terrified and confused uproar which follows the discovery of an escape
tests/les_miserables.txt:48997:creaking of gratings on their hinges, a tumult in the guard-house, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48998:hoarse shouts of the turnkeys, the shock of musket-butts on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:48999:pavement of the courts, reached his ears. Lights ascended and descended
tests/les_miserables.txt:49000:past the grated windows of the dormitories, a torch ran along the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49002:in the barracks on the right had been summoned. Their helmets, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:49003:the torch lighted up in the rain, went and came along the roofs. At the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49004:same time, Thénardier perceived in the direction of the Bastille a wan
tests/les_miserables.txt:49007:He was on top of a wall ten inches wide, stretched out under the heavy
tests/les_miserables.txt:49008:rains, with two gulfs to right and left, unable to stir, subject to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49009:giddiness of a possible fall, and to the horror of a certain arrest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49010:and his thoughts, like the pendulum of a clock, swung from one of these
tests/les_miserables.txt:49011:ideas to the other: “Dead if I fall, caught if I stay.” In the midst of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49013:was gliding along the walls and coming from the Rue Pavée, halt in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49014:recess above which Thénardier was, as it were, suspended. Here this man
tests/les_miserables.txt:49015:was joined by a second, who walked with the same caution, then by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49017:lifted the latch of the gate in the fence, and all four entered the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49018:enclosure in which the shanty stood. They halted directly under
tests/les_miserables.txt:49019:Thénardier. These men had evidently chosen this vacant space in order
tests/les_miserables.txt:49020:that they might consult without being seen by the passers-by or by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49021:sentinel who guards the wicket of La Force a few paces distant. It must
tests/les_miserables.txt:49022:be added, that the rain kept this sentinel blocked in his box.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49024:their words with the desperate attention of a wretch who feels himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:49028:eyes,—these men conversed in slang.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49030:The first said in a low but distinct voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:49032:“Let’s cut. What are we up to here?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49035:The second replied: “It’s raining hard enough to put out the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:49040:These two words, _icigo_ and _icicaille_, both of which mean _ici_, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49041:which belong, the first to the slang of the barriers, the second to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49043:_icigo_ he recognized Brujon, who was a prowler of the barriers, by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49044:_icicaille_ he knew Babet, who, among his other trades, had been an
tests/les_miserables.txt:49045:old-clothes broker at the Temple.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49047:The antique slang of the great century is no longer spoken except in
tests/les_miserables.txt:49049:its purity. Had it not been for the _icicaille_, Thénardier would not
tests/les_miserables.txt:49050:have recognized him, for he had entirely changed his voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49058:By this, which was nothing but French, Thénardier recognized
tests/les_miserables.txt:49059:Montparnasse, who made it a point in his elegance to understand all
tests/les_miserables.txt:49062:As for the fourth, he held his peace, but his huge shoulders betrayed
tests/les_miserables.txt:49067:“What are you jabbering about? The tavern-keeper hasn’t managed to cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:49068:his stick. He don’t tumble to the racket, that he don’t! You have to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:49069:a pretty knowing cove to tear up your shirt, cut up your sheet to make
tests/les_miserables.txt:49070:a rope, punch holes in doors, get up false papers, make false keys,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49071:file your irons, hang out your cord, hide yourself, and disguise
tests/les_miserables.txt:49076:Babet added, still in that classical slang which was spoken by
tests/les_miserables.txt:49077:Poulailler and Cartouche, and which is to the bold, new, highly colored
tests/les_miserables.txt:49078:and risky argot used by Brujon what the language of Racine is to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49081:“Your tavern-keeper must have been nabbed in the act. You have to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:49085:seen all those lights. He’s recaptured, there! He’ll get off with
tests/les_miserables.txt:49086:twenty years. I ain’t afraid, I ain’t a coward, but there ain’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:49087:anything more to do, or otherwise they’d lead us a dance. Don’t get
tests/les_miserables.txt:49088:mad, come with us, let’s go drink a bottle of old wine together.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49091:“One doesn’t desert one’s friends in a scrape,” grumbled Montparnasse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49094:inn-keeper ain’t worth a ha’penny. We can’t do nothing for him. Let’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:49098:Montparnasse no longer offered more than a feeble resistance; the fact
tests/les_miserables.txt:49100:abandon each other, had prowled all night long about La Force, great as
tests/les_miserables.txt:49101:was their peril, in the hope of seeing Thénardier make his appearance
tests/les_miserables.txt:49102:on the top of some wall. But the night, which was really growing too
tests/les_miserables.txt:49103:fine,—for the downpour was such as to render all the streets
tests/les_miserables.txt:49104:deserted,—the cold which was overpowering them, their soaked garments,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49105:their hole-ridden shoes, the alarming noise which had just burst forth
tests/les_miserables.txt:49106:in the prison, the hours which had elapsed, the patrol which they had
tests/les_miserables.txt:49107:encountered, the hope which was vanishing, all urged them to beat a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49110:was panting on his wall like the shipwrecked sufferers of the _Méduse_
tests/les_miserables.txt:49111:on their raft when they beheld the vessel which had appeared in sight
tests/les_miserables.txt:49114:He dared not call to them; a cry might be heard and ruin everything. An
tests/les_miserables.txt:49115:idea occurred to him, a last idea, a flash of inspiration; he drew from
tests/les_miserables.txt:49116:his pocket the end of Brujon’s rope, which he had detached from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49117:chimney of the New Building, and flung it into the space enclosed by
tests/les_miserables.txt:49118:the fence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49130:“Quick!” said Montparnasse, “have you the other end of the rope,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49137:“Knot the two pieces together, we’ll fling him the rope, he can fasten
tests/les_miserables.txt:49143:“I am paralyzed with cold.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49149:“I can’t budge.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49152:“Let yourself slide, we’ll catch you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49161:“I can’t.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49164:“Then one of us must climb up,” said Montparnasse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49166:“Three stories!” ejaculated Brujon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49168:An ancient plaster flue, which had served for a stove that had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:49170:almost to the very spot where they could see Thénardier. This flue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49171:then much damaged and full of cracks, has since fallen, but the marks
tests/les_miserables.txt:49178:“By that flue?” exclaimed Babet, “a grown-up cove, never! it would take
tests/les_miserables.txt:49185:“Wait,” said Montparnasse. “I’ve got the very article.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49187:He opened the gate of the fence very softly, made sure that no one was
tests/les_miserables.txt:49188:passing along the street, stepped out cautiously, shut the gate behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:49189:him, and set off at a run in the direction of the Bastille.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49191:Seven or eight minutes elapsed, eight thousand centuries to Thénardier;
tests/les_miserables.txt:49193:opened once more, and Montparnasse appeared, breathless, and followed
tests/les_miserables.txt:49194:by Gavroche. The rain still rendered the street completely deserted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49196:Little Gavroche entered the enclosure and gazed at the forms of these
tests/les_miserables.txt:49202:Gavroche shrugged his shoulders, and replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:49207:“The brat’s tongue’s well hung!” exclaimed Babet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49211:“What do you want?” asked Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49219:“And fasten it,” continued Brujon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49223:“To the cross-bar of the window,” added Brujon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49225:“And then?” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49230:that indescribable and disdainful noise with his lips which signifies:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:49240:unprecedented one to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49244:Guelemer seized Gavroche by one arm, set him on the roof of the shanty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49245:whose worm-eaten planks bent beneath the urchin’s weight, and handed
tests/les_miserables.txt:49246:him the rope which Brujon had knotted together during Montparnasse’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:49247:absence. The gamin directed his steps towards the flue, which it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:49248:easy to enter, thanks to a large crack which touched the roof. At the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49249:moment when he was on the point of ascending, Thénardier, who saw life
tests/les_miserables.txt:49250:and safety approaching, bent over the edge of the wall; the first light
tests/les_miserables.txt:49251:of dawn struck white upon his brow dripping with sweat, upon his livid
tests/les_miserables.txt:49252:cheek-bones, his sharp and savage nose, his bristling gray beard, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49253:Gavroche recognized him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49258:And taking the rope in his teeth, he resolutely began the ascent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49260:He reached the summit of the hut, bestrode the old wall as though it
tests/les_miserables.txt:49261:had been a horse, and knotted the rope firmly to the upper cross-bar of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49266:As soon as he touched the pavement, as soon as he found himself out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49267:danger, he was no longer either weary, or chilled or trembling; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49268:terrible things from which he had escaped vanished like smoke, all that
tests/les_miserables.txt:49269:strange and ferocious mind awoke once more, and stood erect and free,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49270:ready to march onward.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49278:remark, which signifies both to kill, to assassinate, and to plunder.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49281:“Let’s get well into a corner,” said Brujon. “Let’s settle it in three
tests/les_miserables.txt:49282:words, and part at once. There was an affair that promised well in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49291:“And she brought a biscuit to Magnon,” added Guelemer. “Nothing to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:49301:In the meanwhile, none of the men seemed to see Gavroche, who, during
tests/les_miserables.txt:49302:this colloquy, had seated himself on one of the fence-posts; he waited
tests/les_miserables.txt:49307:scrape. I’m off. I must go and get my brats out of bed.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49311:The five men emerged, one after another, from the enclosure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49313:When Gavroche had disappeared at the corner of the Rue des Ballets,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49320:“The one who climbed the wall and carried you the rope.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49322:“Not particularly.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49346:It engenders a whole world, _la pègre_, for which read _theft_, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49347:hell, _la pègrenne_, for which read _hunger_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49355:What is slang? It is at one and the same time, a nation and a dialect;
tests/les_miserables.txt:49359:history introduced into a work written with the same aim as this39 a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49360:thief who talked argot, there arose amazement and clamor.—“What! How!
tests/les_miserables.txt:49362:convicts, of everything that is most abominable in society!” etc., etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49364:We have never understood this sort of objections.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49366:Since that time, two powerful romancers, one of whom is a profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:49368:people, Balzac and Eugène Sue, having represented their ruffians as
tests/les_miserables.txt:49370:Condemned Man_ did in 1828, the same objections have been raised.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49371:People repeated: “What do authors mean by that revolting dialect? Slang
tests/les_miserables.txt:49375:Who denies that? Of course it does.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49377:When it is a question of probing a wound, a gulf, a society, since when
tests/les_miserables.txt:49378:has it been considered wrong to go too far? to go to the bottom? We
tests/les_miserables.txt:49379:have always thought that it was sometimes a courageous act, and, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:49380:least, a simple and useful deed, worthy of the sympathetic attention
tests/les_miserables.txt:49381:which duty accepted and fulfilled merits. Why should one not explore
tests/les_miserables.txt:49386:Certainly, too, it is neither an attractive nor an easy task to
tests/les_miserables.txt:49387:undertake an investigation into the lowest depths of the social order,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49388:where terra firma comes to an end and where mud begins, to rummage in
tests/les_miserables.txt:49390:quivering, upon the pavement that abject dialect which is dripping with
tests/les_miserables.txt:49391:filth when thus brought to the light, that pustulous vocabulary each
tests/les_miserables.txt:49392:word of which seems an unclean ring from a monster of the mire and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49393:shadows. Nothing is more lugubrious than the contemplation thus in its
tests/les_miserables.txt:49395:slang. It seems, in fact, to be a sort of horrible beast made for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49396:night which has just been torn from its cesspool. One thinks one
tests/les_miserables.txt:49397:beholds a frightful, living, and bristling thicket which quivers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49399:resembles a claw, another an extinguished and bleeding eye, such and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49400:such a phrase seems to move like the claw of a crab. All this is alive
tests/les_miserables.txt:49401:with the hideous vitality of things which have been organized out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49404:Now, when has horror ever excluded study? Since when has malady
tests/les_miserables.txt:49405:banished medicine? Can one imagine a naturalist refusing to study the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49406:viper, the bat, the scorpion, the centipede, the tarantula, and one who
tests/les_miserables.txt:49407:would cast them back into their darkness, saying: “Oh! how ugly that
tests/les_miserables.txt:49409:surgeon who should avert his face from an ulcer or a wart. He would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:49410:like a philologist refusing to examine a fact in language, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49411:philosopher hesitating to scrutinize a fact in humanity. For, it must
tests/les_miserables.txt:49412:be stated to those who are ignorant of the case, that argot is both a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49413:literary phenomenon and a social result. What is slang, properly
tests/les_miserables.txt:49414:speaking? It is the language of wretchedness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49416:We may be stopped; the fact may be put to us in general terms, which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49418:professions, it may be added, all the accidents of the social hierarchy
tests/les_miserables.txt:49419:and all forms of intelligence, have their own slang. The merchant who
tests/les_miserables.txt:49420:says: “Montpellier not active, Marseilles fine quality,” the broker on
tests/les_miserables.txt:49421:’change who says: “Assets at end of current month,” the gambler who
tests/les_miserables.txt:49424:cannot claim the fruits of that estate during the hereditary seizure of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49425:the real estate by the mortgagor,” the playwright who says: “The piece
tests/les_miserables.txt:49426:was hissed,” the comedian who says: “I’ve made a hit,” the philosopher
tests/les_miserables.txt:49427:who says: “Phenomenal triplicity,” the huntsman who says: _“Voileci
tests/les_miserables.txt:49428:allais, Voileci fuyant,”_ the phrenologist who says: “Amativeness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49429:combativeness, secretiveness,” the infantry soldier who says: “My
tests/les_miserables.txt:49430:shooting-iron,” the cavalry-man who says: “My turkey-cock,” the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49431:fencing-master who says: “Tierce, quarte, break,” the printer who says:
tests/les_miserables.txt:49432:“My shooting-stick and galley,”—all, printer, fencing-master, cavalry
tests/les_miserables.txt:49433:dragoon, infantry-man, phrenologist, huntsman, philosopher, comedian,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49434:playwright, sheriff, gambler, stock-broker, and merchant, speak slang.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49436:Skip-the-Gutter,” the hairdresser who says: “My mealyback,” the cobbler
tests/les_miserables.txt:49437:who says: “My cub,” talks slang. Strictly speaking, if one absolutely
tests/les_miserables.txt:49439:and the left, the sailor’s _port_ and _starboard_, the scene-shifter’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:49440:_court-side_, and _garden-side_, the beadle’s _Gospel-side_ and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49441:_Epistle-side_, are slang. There is the slang of the affected lady as
tests/les_miserables.txt:49442:well as of the _précieuses_. The Hotel Rambouillet nearly adjoins the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49443:Cour des Miracles. There is a slang of duchesses, witness this phrase
tests/les_miserables.txt:49444:contained in a love-letter from a very great lady and a very pretty
tests/les_miserables.txt:49446:reasons why I should libertize.”40 Diplomatic ciphers are slang; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49447:pontifical chancellery by using 26 for Rome, _grkztntgzyal_ for
tests/les_miserables.txt:49448:despatch, and _abfxustgrnogrkzu tu XI_. for the Duc de Modena, speaks
tests/les_miserables.txt:49449:slang. The physicians of the Middle Ages who, for carrot, radish, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49450:turnip, said _Opoponach, perfroschinum, reptitalmus, dracatholicum,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49451:angelorum, postmegorum_, talked slang. The sugar-manufacturer who says:
tests/les_miserables.txt:49452:“Loaf, clarified, lumps, bastard, common, burnt,”—this honest
tests/les_miserables.txt:49453:manufacturer talks slang. A certain school of criticism twenty years
tests/les_miserables.txt:49454:ago, which used to say: “Half of the works of Shakespeare consists of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49456:with profound understanding, would designate M. de Montmorency as “a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49458:The classic Academician who calls flowers “Flora,” fruits, “Pomona,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49459:the sea, “Neptune,” love, “fires,” beauty, “charms,” a horse, “a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49460:courser,” the white or tricolored cockade, “the rose of Bellona,” the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49461:three-cornered hat, “Mars’ triangle,”—that classical Academician talks
tests/les_miserables.txt:49462:slang. Algebra, medicine, botany, have each their slang. The tongue
tests/les_miserables.txt:49463:which is employed on board ship, that wonderful language of the sea,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49464:which is so complete and so picturesque, which was spoken by Jean Bart,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49465:Duquesne, Suffren, and Duperré, which mingles with the whistling of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49466:rigging, the sound of the speaking-trumpets, the shock of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49467:boarding-irons, the roll of the sea, the wind, the gale, the cannon, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49468:wholly a heroic and dazzling slang, which is to the fierce slang of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49469:thieves what the lion is to the jackal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49472:_slang_ is an extension which every one will not admit. For our part,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49473:we reserve to the word its ancient and precise, circumscribed and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49474:determined significance, and we restrict slang to slang. The veritable
tests/les_miserables.txt:49475:slang and the slang that is pre-eminently slang, if the two words can
tests/les_miserables.txt:49476:be coupled thus, the slang immemorial which was a kingdom, is nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:49477:else, we repeat, than the homely, uneasy, crafty, treacherous,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49478:venomous, cruel, equivocal, vile, profound, fatal tongue of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49479:wretchedness. There exists, at the extremity of all abasement and all
tests/les_miserables.txt:49480:misfortunes, a last misery which revolts and makes up its mind to enter
tests/les_miserables.txt:49481:into conflict with the whole mass of fortunate facts and reigning
tests/les_miserables.txt:49482:rights; a fearful conflict, where, now cunning, now violent, unhealthy
tests/les_miserables.txt:49483:and ferocious at one and the same time, it attacks the social order
tests/les_miserables.txt:49484:with pin-pricks through vice, and with club-blows through crime. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:49485:meet the needs of this conflict, wretchedness has invented a language
tests/les_miserables.txt:49486:of combat, which is slang.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49488:To keep afloat and to rescue from oblivion, to hold above the gulf,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49489:were it but a fragment of some language which man has spoken and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:49491:bad, of which civilization is composed, or by which it is complicated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49492:to extend the records of social observation; is to serve civilization
tests/les_miserables.txt:49493:itself. This service Plautus rendered, consciously or unconsciously, by
tests/les_miserables.txt:49494:making two Carthaginian soldiers talk Phœnician; that service Molière
tests/les_miserables.txt:49495:rendered, by making so many of his characters talk Levantine and all
tests/les_miserables.txt:49496:sorts of dialects. Here objections spring up afresh. Phœnician, very
tests/les_miserables.txt:49497:good! Levantine, quite right! Even dialect, let that pass! They are
tests/les_miserables.txt:49498:tongues which have belonged to nations or provinces; but slang! What is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49502:To this we reply in one word, only. Assuredly, if the tongue which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49503:nation or a province has spoken is worthy of interest, the language
tests/les_miserables.txt:49504:which has been spoken by a misery is still more worthy of attention and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49507:It is the language which has been spoken, in France, for example, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:49508:more than four centuries, not only by a misery, but by every possible
tests/les_miserables.txt:49511:And then, we insist upon it, the study of social deformities and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49513:is not a business in which choice is permitted. The historian of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49515:events. The latter has the surface of civilization, the conflicts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49516:crowns, the births of princes, the marriages of kings, battles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49517:assemblages, great public men, revolutions in the daylight, everything
tests/les_miserables.txt:49520:child, the secret war between man and man, obscure ferocities,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49521:prejudices, plotted iniquities, the subterranean, the indistinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:49522:tremors of multitudes, the die-of-hunger, the counter-blows of the law,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49523:the secret evolution of souls, the go-bare-foot, the bare-armed, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49525:which roam through the darkness. He must descend with his heart full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49526:charity, and severity at the same time, as a brother and as a judge, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:49527:those impenetrable casemates where crawl, pell-mell, those who bleed
tests/les_miserables.txt:49528:and those who deal the blow, those who weep and those who curse, those
tests/les_miserables.txt:49530:inflict it. Have these historians of hearts and souls duties at all
tests/les_miserables.txt:49531:inferior to the historians of external facts? Does any one think that
tests/les_miserables.txt:49532:Alighieri has any fewer things to say than Machiavelli? Is the under
tests/les_miserables.txt:49533:side of civilization any less important than the upper side merely
tests/les_miserables.txt:49534:because it is deeper and more sombre? Do we really know the mountain
tests/les_miserables.txt:49535:well when we are not acquainted with the cavern?
tests/les_miserables.txt:49537:Let us say, moreover, parenthetically, that from a few words of what
tests/les_miserables.txt:49538:precedes a marked separation might be inferred between the two classes
tests/les_miserables.txt:49539:of historians which does not exist in our mind. No one is a good
tests/les_miserables.txt:49540:historian of the patent, visible, striking, and public life of peoples,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49541:if he is not, at the same time, in a certain measure, the historian of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49545:of events, and this is true reciprocally. They constitute two different
tests/les_miserables.txt:49546:orders of facts which correspond to each other, which are always
tests/les_miserables.txt:49547:interlaced, and which often bring forth results. All the lineaments
tests/les_miserables.txt:49548:which providence traces on the surface of a nation have their
tests/les_miserables.txt:49549:parallels, sombre but distinct, in their depths, and all convulsions of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49550:the depths produce ebullitions on the surface. True history being a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49553:Man is not a circle with a single centre; he is an ellipse with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49554:double focus. Facts form one of these, and ideas the other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49557:action to perform, disguises itself. There it clothes itself in
tests/les_miserables.txt:49558:word-masks, in metaphor-rags. In this guise it becomes horrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49560:One finds it difficult to recognize. Is it really the French tongue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49562:retort upon crime, and prepared for all the employments of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49564:crutch of the Court of Miracles, a crutch metamorphosable into a club;
tests/les_miserables.txt:49565:it is called vagrancy; every sort of spectre, its dressers, have
tests/les_miserables.txt:49566:painted its face, it crawls and rears, the double gait of the reptile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49567:Henceforth, it is apt at all rôles, it is made suspicious by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49568:counterfeiter, covered with verdigris by the forger, blacked by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49569:soot of the incendiary; and the murderer applies its rouge.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49571:When one listens, by the side of honest men, at the portals of society,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49573:distinguishes questions and replies. One perceives, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:49574:understanding it, a hideous murmur, sounding almost like human accents,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49575:but more nearly resembling a howl than an articulate word. It is slang.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49576:The words are misshapen and stamped with an indescribable and fantastic
tests/les_miserables.txt:49579:It is unintelligible in the dark. It gnashes and whispers, completing
tests/les_miserables.txt:49580:the gloom with mystery. It is black in misfortune, it is blacker still
tests/les_miserables.txt:49581:in crime; these two blacknesses amalgamated, compose slang. Obscurity
tests/les_miserables.txt:49582:in the atmosphere, obscurity in acts, obscurity in voices. Terrible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49583:toad-like tongue which goes and comes, leaps, crawls, slobbers, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49584:stirs about in monstrous wise in that immense gray fog composed of rain
tests/les_miserables.txt:49585:and night, of hunger, of vice, of falsehood, of injustice, of nudity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49586:of suffocation, and of winter, the high noonday of the miserable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49588:Let us have compassion on the chastised. Alas! Who are we ourselves?
tests/les_miserables.txt:49591:earth is not devoid of resemblance to a jail. Who knows whether man is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49592:not a recaptured offender against divine justice? Look closely at life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49595:Are you what is called a happy man? Well! you are sad every day. Each
tests/les_miserables.txt:49596:day has its own great grief or its little care. Yesterday you were
tests/les_miserables.txt:49601:broken or lost, then a pleasure with which your conscience and your
tests/les_miserables.txt:49602:vertebral column reproach you; again, the course of public affairs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49603:This without reckoning in the pains of the heart. And so it goes on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49604:One cloud is dispelled, another forms. There is hardly one day out of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49605:hundred which is wholly joyous and sunny. And you belong to that small
tests/les_miserables.txt:49606:class who are happy! As for the rest of mankind, stagnating night rests
tests/les_miserables.txt:49615:luminous,—that is the object. That is why we cry: Education! science!
tests/les_miserables.txt:49616:To teach reading, means to light the fire; every syllable spelled out
tests/les_miserables.txt:49619:However, he who says light does not, necessarily, say joy. People
tests/les_miserables.txt:49620:suffer in the light; excess burns. The flame is the enemy of the wing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49621:To burn without ceasing to fly,—therein lies the marvel of genius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49635:Thought is moved in its most sombre depths, social philosophy is bidden
tests/les_miserables.txt:49636:to its most poignant meditations, in the presence of that enigmatic
tests/les_miserables.txt:49637:dialect at once so blighted and rebellious. Therein lies chastisement
tests/les_miserables.txt:49640:beneath the hot iron of the executioner. Some seem to be still smoking.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49641:Such and such a phrase produces upon you the effect of the shoulder of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49642:a thief branded with the fleur-de-lys, which has suddenly been laid
tests/les_miserables.txt:49643:bare. Ideas almost refuse to be expressed in these substantives which
tests/les_miserables.txt:49644:are fugitives from justice. Metaphor is sometimes so shameless, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:49645:one feels that it has worn the iron neck-fetter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49647:Moreover, in spite of all this, and because of all this, this strange
tests/les_miserables.txt:49648:dialect has by rights, its own compartment in that great impartial case
tests/les_miserables.txt:49650:for the gold medal, and which is called literature. Slang, whether the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49651:public admit the fact or not has its syntax and its poetry. It is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49652:language. Yes, by the deformity of certain terms, we recognize the fact
tests/les_miserables.txt:49653:that it was chewed by Mandrin, and by the splendor of certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:49656:That exquisite and celebrated verse—
tests/les_miserables.txt:49663:which signified the past year, and by extension, _formerly_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49664:Thirty-five years ago, at the epoch of the departure of the great
tests/les_miserables.txt:49665:chain-gang, there could be read in one of the cells at Bicêtre, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:49666:maxim engraved with a nail on the wall by a king of Thunes condemned to
tests/les_miserables.txt:49672:The word _décarade_, which expresses the departure of heavy vehicles at
tests/les_miserables.txt:49674:which strikes fire with all four of its feet, sums up in a masterly
tests/les_miserables.txt:49677:Six forts chevaux tiraient un coche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49678:Six stout horses drew a coach.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49682:curious and fruitful than the study of slang. It is a whole language
tests/les_miserables.txt:49683:within a language, a sort of sickly excrescence, an unhealthy graft
tests/les_miserables.txt:49684:which has produced a vegetation, a parasite which has its roots in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49685:old Gallic trunk, and whose sinister foliage crawls all over one side
tests/les_miserables.txt:49686:of the language. This is what may be called the first, the vulgar
tests/les_miserables.txt:49687:aspect of slang. But, for those who study the tongue as it should be
tests/les_miserables.txt:49689:like a veritable alluvial deposit. According as one digs a longer or
tests/les_miserables.txt:49690:shorter distance into it, one finds in slang, below the old popular
tests/les_miserables.txt:49691:French, Provençal, Spanish, Italian, Levantine, that language of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49692:Mediterranean ports, English and German, the Romance language in its
tests/les_miserables.txt:49693:three varieties, French, Italian, and Romance Romance, Latin, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49694:finally Basque and Celtic. A profound and unique formation. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:49695:subterranean edifice erected in common by all the miserable. Each
tests/les_miserables.txt:49696:accursed race has deposited its layer, each suffering has dropped its
tests/les_miserables.txt:49697:stone there, each heart has contributed its pebble. A throng of evil,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49702:Do you want Spanish? The old Gothic slang abounded in it. Here is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49703:_boffete_, a box on the ear, which is derived from _bofeton; vantane_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49704:window (later on _vanterne_), which comes from _vantana; gat_, cat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49705:which comes from _gato; acite_, oil, which comes from _aceyte_. Do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:49706:want Italian? Here is _spade_, sword, which comes from _spada; carvel_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49707:boat, which comes from _caravella_. Do you want English? Here is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49708:_bichot_, which comes from _bishop; raille_, spy, which comes from
tests/les_miserables.txt:49709:_rascal, rascalion; pilche_, a case, which comes from _pilcher_, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49710:sheath. Do you want German? Here is the _caleur_, the waiter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49713:cadene_, chain, _catena_. There is one word which crops up in every
tests/les_miserables.txt:49714:language of the continent, with a sort of mysterious power and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49715:authority. It is the word _magnus_; the Scotchman makes of it his
tests/les_miserables.txt:49716:_mac_, which designates the chief of the clan; Mac-Farlane,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49717:Mac-Callumore, the great Farlane, the great Callumore41; slang turns it
tests/les_miserables.txt:49718:into _meck_ and later _le meg_, that is to say, God. Would you like
tests/les_miserables.txt:49719:Basque? Here is _gahisto_, the devil, which comes from _gaïztoa_, evil;
tests/les_miserables.txt:49720:_sorgabon_, good night, which comes from _gabon_, good evening. Do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:49721:want Celtic? Here is _blavin_, a handkerchief, which comes from
tests/les_miserables.txt:49722:_blavet_, gushing water; _ménesse_, a woman (in a bad sense), which
tests/les_miserables.txt:49723:comes from _meinec_, full of stones; _barant_, brook, from _baranton_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49724:fountain; _goffeur_, locksmith, from _goff_, blacksmith; _guedouze_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49725:death, which comes from _guenn-du_, black-white. Finally, would you
tests/les_miserables.txt:49726:like history? Slang calls crowns _les maltèses_, a souvenir of the coin
tests/les_miserables.txt:49727:in circulation on the galleys of Malta.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49729:In addition to the philological origins just indicated, slang possesses
tests/les_miserables.txt:49730:other and still more natural roots, which spring, so to speak, from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49733:In the first place, the direct creation of words. Therein lies the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49734:mystery of tongues. To paint with words, which contains figures one
tests/les_miserables.txt:49736:languages, what may be called their granite.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49738:Slang abounds in words of this description, immediate words, words
tests/les_miserables.txt:49739:created instantaneously no one knows either where or by whom, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:49741:sometimes hideous words, which at times possess a singular power of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49742:expression and which live. The executioner, _le taule_; the forest, _le
tests/les_miserables.txt:49743:sabri_; fear, flight, _taf_; the lackey, _le larbin_; the mineral, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49744:prefect, the minister, _pharos_; the devil, _le rabouin_. Nothing is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49745:stranger than these words which both mask and reveal. Some, _le
tests/les_miserables.txt:49747:produce on you the effect of a cyclopean grimace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49749:In the second place, metaphor. The peculiarity of a language which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49750:desirous of saying all yet concealing all is that it is rich in
tests/les_miserables.txt:49752:stroke, the prisoner who is arranging an escape, take refuge. No idiom
tests/les_miserables.txt:49753:is more metaphorical than slang: _dévisser le coco_ (to unscrew the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49754:nut), to twist the neck; _tortiller_ (to wriggle), to eat; _être
tests/les_miserables.txt:49756:a striking, ancient figure which partly bears its date about it, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:49758:pikes of the lancers, and which compresses into a single word the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49760:slang progresses from the first epoch to the second, words pass from
tests/les_miserables.txt:49761:the primitive and savage sense to the metaphorical sense. The devil
tests/les_miserables.txt:49762:ceases to be _le rabouin_, and becomes _le boulanger_ (the baker), who
tests/les_miserables.txt:49764:something like Racine after Corneille, like Euripides after Æschylus.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49765:Certain slang phrases which participate in the two epochs and have at
tests/les_miserables.txt:49766:once the barbaric character and the metaphorical character resemble
tests/les_miserables.txt:49767:phantasmagories. _Les sorgueuers vont solliciter des gails à la
tests/les_miserables.txt:49769:before the mind like a group of spectres. One knows not what one sees.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49771:In the third place, the expedient. Slang lives on the language. It uses
tests/les_miserables.txt:49772:it in accordance with its fancy, it dips into it hap-hazard, and it
tests/les_miserables.txt:49773:often confines itself, when occasion arises, to alter it in a gross and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49774:summary fashion. Occasionally, with the ordinary words thus deformed
tests/les_miserables.txt:49775:and complicated with words of pure slang, picturesque phrases are
tests/les_miserables.txt:49776:formed, in which there can be felt the mixture of the two preceding
tests/les_miserables.txt:49777:elements, the direct creation and the metaphor: _le cab jaspine, je
tests/les_miserables.txt:49779:barking, I suspect that the diligence for Paris is passing through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49781:bative_, the bourgeois is stupid, the bourgeoise is cunning, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49782:daughter is pretty. Generally, to throw listeners off the track, slang
tests/les_miserables.txt:49783:confines itself to adding to all the words of the language without
tests/les_miserables.txt:49784:distinction, an ignoble tail, a termination in _aille_, in _orgue_, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:49785:_iergue_, or in _uche_. Thus: _Vousiergue trouvaille bonorgue ce
tests/les_miserables.txt:49786:gigotmuche?_ Do you think that leg of mutton good? A phrase addressed
tests/les_miserables.txt:49787:by Cartouche to a turnkey in order to find out whether the sum offered
tests/les_miserables.txt:49788:for his escape suited him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49790:The termination in _mar_ has been added recently.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49792:Slang, being the dialect of corruption, quickly becomes corrupted
tests/les_miserables.txt:49793:itself. Besides this, as it is always seeking concealment, as soon as
tests/les_miserables.txt:49794:it feels that it is understood, it changes its form. Contrary to what
tests/les_miserables.txt:49795:happens with every other vegetation, every ray of light which falls
tests/les_miserables.txt:49796:upon it kills whatever it touches. Thus slang is in constant process of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49797:decomposition and recomposition; an obscure and rapid work which never
tests/les_miserables.txt:49799:centuries. Thus _le larton_ (bread) becomes _le lartif; le gail_
tests/les_miserables.txt:49800:(horse) becomes _le gaye; la fertanche_ (straw) becomes _la fertille;
tests/les_miserables.txt:49801:le momignard_ (brat), _le momacque; les fiques_ (duds), _frusques; la
tests/les_miserables.txt:49802:chique_ (the church), _l’égrugeoir; le colabre_ (neck), _le colas_. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:49804:priest is a _ratichon_, then the boar (_le sanglier_); the dagger is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49806:police are _railles_, then _roussins_, then _rousses_, then _marchands
tests/les_miserables.txt:49807:de lacets_ (dealers in stay-laces), then _coquers_, then _cognes_; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49808:executioner is _le taule_, then _Charlot, l’atigeur_, then _le
tests/les_miserables.txt:49809:becquillard_. In the seventeenth century, to fight was “to give each
tests/les_miserables.txt:49810:other snuff”; in the nineteenth it is “to chew each other’s throats.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49812:Cartouche’s talk would have been Hebrew to Lacenaire. All the words of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49816:Still, from time to time, and in consequence of this very movement, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49817:ancient slang crops up again and becomes new once more. It has its
tests/les_miserables.txt:49819:slang of the seventeenth century; Bicêtre, when it was a prison,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49820:preserved the slang of Thunes. There one could hear the termination in
tests/les_miserables.txt:49821:_anche_ of the old Thuneurs. _Boyanches-tu_ (bois-tu), do you drink?
tests/les_miserables.txt:49824:If the philosopher succeeds in fixing, for a moment, for purposes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49825:observation, this language which is incessantly evaporating, he falls
tests/les_miserables.txt:49826:into doleful and useful meditation. No study is more efficacious and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49827:more fecund in instruction. There is not a metaphor, not an analogy, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:49828:slang, which does not contain a lesson. Among these men, to beat means
tests/les_miserables.txt:49832:darkness. The night is called _la sorgue_; man, _l’orgue_. Man is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49835:They have taken up the practice of considering society in the light of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49836:an atmosphere which kills them, of a fatal force, and they speak of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49838:_sick man_; one who is condemned is a _dead man_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49840:The most terrible thing for the prisoner within the four walls in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:49841:he is buried, is a sort of glacial chastity, and he calls the dungeon
tests/les_miserables.txt:49842:the _castus_. In that funereal place, life outside always presents
tests/les_miserables.txt:49843:itself under its most smiling aspect. The prisoner has irons on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:49846:dances; so, when he has succeeded in severing his fetters, his first
tests/les_miserables.txt:49847:idea is that now he can dance, and he calls the saw the _bastringue_
tests/les_miserables.txt:49848:(public-house ball).—A name is a centre; profound assimilation.—The
tests/les_miserables.txt:49849:ruffian has two heads, one of which reasons out his actions and leads
tests/les_miserables.txt:49850:him all his life long, and the other which he has upon his shoulders on
tests/les_miserables.txt:49851:the day of his death; he calls the head which counsels him in crime _la
tests/les_miserables.txt:49852:sorbonne_, and the head which expiates it _la tronche_.—When a man has
tests/les_miserables.txt:49853:no longer anything but rags upon his body and vices in his heart, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:49854:he has arrived at that double moral and material degradation which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49855:word blackguard characterizes in its two acceptations, he is ripe for
tests/les_miserables.txt:49856:crime; he is like a well-whetted knife; he has two cutting edges, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:49857:distress and his malice; so slang does not say a blackguard, it says
tests/les_miserables.txt:49859:convict calls himself a _fagot_.—And finally, what name do malefactors
tests/les_miserables.txt:49860:give to their prison? The _college_. A whole penitentiary system can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:49864:galleys, those refrains called in the special vocabulary _lirlonfa_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49869:There existed at the Châtelet in Paris a large and long cellar. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:49870:cellar was eight feet below the level of the Seine. It had neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:49871:windows nor air-holes, its only aperture was the door; men could enter
tests/les_miserables.txt:49872:there, air could not. This vault had for ceiling a vault of stone, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49873:for floor ten inches of mud. It was flagged; but the pavement had
tests/les_miserables.txt:49874:rotted and cracked under the oozing of the water. Eight feet above the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49875:floor, a long and massive beam traversed this subterranean excavation
tests/les_miserables.txt:49876:from side to side; from this beam hung, at short distances apart,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49877:chains three feet long, and at the end of these chains there were rings
tests/les_miserables.txt:49878:for the neck. In this vault, men who had been condemned to the galleys
tests/les_miserables.txt:49879:were incarcerated until the day of their departure for Toulon. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:49880:were thrust under this beam, where each one found his fetters swinging
tests/les_miserables.txt:49883:The chains, those pendant arms, and the necklets, those open hands,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49884:caught the unhappy wretches by the throat. They were rivetted and left
tests/les_miserables.txt:49885:there. As the chain was too short, they could not lie down. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:49886:remained motionless in that cavern, in that night, beneath that beam,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49887:almost hanging, forced to unheard-of efforts to reach their bread, jug,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49889:very calves, broken asunder with fatigue, with thighs and knees giving
tests/les_miserables.txt:49890:way, clinging fast to the chain with their hands in order to obtain
tests/les_miserables.txt:49891:some rest, unable to sleep except when standing erect, and awakened
tests/les_miserables.txt:49892:every moment by the strangling of the collar; some woke no more. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:49893:order to eat, they pushed the bread, which was flung to them in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49894:mud, along their leg with their heel until it reached their hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49897:sometimes; one stayed a year. It was the antechamber of the galleys.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49899:sepulchre-hell, what did they do? What man can do in a sepulchre, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:49900:went through the agonies of death, and what can man do in hell, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:49902:of Malta, when a galley was approaching, the song could be heard before
tests/les_miserables.txt:49903:the sound of the oars. Poor Survincent, the poacher, who had gone
tests/les_miserables.txt:49904:through the prison-cellar of the Châtelet, said: “It was the rhymes
tests/les_miserables.txt:49907:It is in this cellar that nearly all the slang songs had their birth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49908:It is from the dungeon of the Grand-Châtelet of Paris that comes the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49909:melancholy refrain of the Montgomery galley: _“Timaloumisaine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49910:timaloumison.”_ The majority of these songs are melancholy; some are
tests/les_miserables.txt:49913:    Icicaille est la theatre
tests/les_miserables.txt:49917:    Of the little archer (Cupid).
tests/les_miserables.txt:49920:Do what you will, you cannot annihilate that eternal relic in the heart
tests/les_miserables.txt:49923:In this world of dismal deeds, people keep their secrets. The secret is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49924:the thing above all others. The secret, in the eyes of these wretches,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49925:is unity which serves as a base of union. To betray a secret is to tear
tests/les_miserables.txt:49926:from each member of this fierce community something of his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:49927:personality. To inform against, in the energetic slang dialect, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49928:called: “to eat the bit.” As though the informer drew to himself a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49929:little of the substance of all and nourished himself on a bit of each
tests/les_miserables.txt:49932:What does it signify to receive a box on the ear? Commonplace metaphor
tests/les_miserables.txt:49933:replies: “It is to see thirty-six candles.” Here slang intervenes and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49934:takes it up: Candle, _camoufle_. Thereupon, the ordinary tongue gives
tests/les_miserables.txt:49935:_camouflet_42 as the synonym for _soufflet_. Thus, by a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49937:incalculable, trajectory slang mounts from the cavern to the Academy;
tests/les_miserables.txt:49938:and Poulailler saying: “I light my _camoufle_,” causes Voltaire to
tests/les_miserables.txt:49939:write: “Langleviel La Beaumelle deserves a hundred _camouflets_.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:49942:Researches in slang mean discoveries at every step. Study and
tests/les_miserables.txt:49944:intersection of regular society with society which is accursed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49946:The thief also has his food for cannon, stealable matter, you, I,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49949:Slang is language turned convict.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49951:That the thinking principle of man be thrust down ever so low, that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:49952:can be dragged and pinioned there by obscure tyrannies of fatality,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49953:that it can be bound by no one knows what fetters in that abyss, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:49954:sufficient to create consternation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:49956:Oh, poor thought of miserable wretches!
tests/les_miserables.txt:49958:Alas! will no one come to the succor of the human soul in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:49960:liberator, the immense rider of Pegasi and hippogriffs, the combatant
tests/les_miserables.txt:49961:of heroes of the dawn who shall descend from the azure between two
tests/les_miserables.txt:49963:vain to her assistance the lance of light of the ideal? Is she
tests/les_miserables.txt:49964:condemned to hear the fearful approach of Evil through the density of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49965:the gulf, and to catch glimpses, nearer and nearer at hand, beneath the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49967:that writhing undulation of claws, swellings, and rings? Must it remain
tests/les_miserables.txt:49969:terrible approach, vaguely scented out by the monster, shuddering,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49970:dishevelled, wringing its arms, forever chained to the rock of night, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49979:As the reader perceives, slang in its entirety, slang of four hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:49981:symbolical spirit which gives to all words a mien which is now
tests/les_miserables.txt:49982:mournful, now menacing. One feels in it the wild and ancient sadness of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49983:those vagrants of the Court of Miracles who played at cards with packs
tests/les_miserables.txt:49984:of their own, some of which have come down to us. The eight of clubs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:49985:for instance, represented a huge tree bearing eight enormous trefoil
tests/les_miserables.txt:49986:leaves, a sort of fantastic personification of the forest. At the foot
tests/les_miserables.txt:49987:of this tree a fire was burning, over which three hares were roasting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49989:pot, whence emerged the head of a dog. Nothing can be more melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:49990:than these reprisals in painting, by a pack of cards, in the presence
tests/les_miserables.txt:49991:of stakes for the roasting of smugglers and of the cauldron for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49992:boiling of counterfeiters. The diverse forms assumed by thought in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49993:realm of slang, even song, even raillery, even menace, all partook of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49994:this powerless and dejected character. All the songs, the melodies of
tests/les_miserables.txt:49995:some of which have been collected, were humble and lamentable to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:49998:hardly complains, he contents himself with sighing; one of his moans
tests/les_miserables.txt:49999:has come down to us: “I do not understand how God, the father of men,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50000:can torture his children and his grandchildren and hear them cry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50001:without himself suffering torture.”43 The wretch, whenever he has time
tests/les_miserables.txt:50002:to think, makes himself small before the low, and frail in the presence
tests/les_miserables.txt:50003:of society; he lies down flat on his face, he entreats, he appeals to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50004:the side of compassion; we feel that he is conscious of his guilt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50006:Towards the middle of the last century a change took place, prison
tests/les_miserables.txt:50008:jovial mien. The plaintive _maluré_ was replaced by the _larifla_. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:50009:find in the eighteenth century, in nearly all the songs of the galleys
tests/les_miserables.txt:50010:and prisons, a diabolical and enigmatical gayety. We hear this strident
tests/les_miserables.txt:50011:and lilting refrain which we should say had been lighted up by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50012:phosphorescent gleam, and which seems to have been flung into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50021:This was sung in a cellar or in a nook of the forest while cutting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50024:A serious symptom. In the eighteenth century, the ancient melancholy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50025:the dejected classes vanishes. They began to laugh. They rally the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50026:_grand meg_ and the _grand dab_. Given Louis XV. they call the King of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50027:France “le Marquis de Pantin.” And behold, they are almost gay. A sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:50028:of gleam proceeds from these miserable wretches, as though their
tests/les_miserables.txt:50029:consciences were not heavy within them any more. These lamentable
tests/les_miserables.txt:50030:tribes of darkness have no longer merely the desperate audacity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50031:actions, they possess the heedless audacity of mind. A sign that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:50032:are losing the sense of their criminality, and that they feel, even
tests/les_miserables.txt:50033:among thinkers and dreamers, some indefinable support which the latter
tests/les_miserables.txt:50035:filter into doctrines and sophisms, in such a way as to lose somewhat
tests/les_miserables.txt:50036:of their ugliness, while communicating much of it to sophisms and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50037:doctrines. A sign, in short, of some outbreak which is prodigious and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50040:Let us pause a moment. Whom are we accusing here? Is it the eighteenth
tests/les_miserables.txt:50041:century? Is it philosophy? Certainly not. The work of the eighteenth
tests/les_miserables.txt:50042:century is healthy and good and wholesome. The encyclopedists, Diderot
tests/les_miserables.txt:50043:at their head; the physiocrates, Turgot at their head; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50045:head,—these are four sacred legions. Humanity’s immense advance towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:50047:race, marching towards the four cardinal points of progress. Diderot
tests/les_miserables.txt:50051:with a healthy growth, hemlock in the virgin forest. While the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50052:executioner was burning the great books of the liberators of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50053:century on the grand staircase of the court-house, writers now
tests/les_miserables.txt:50054:forgotten were publishing, with the King’s sanction, no one knows what
tests/les_miserables.txt:50055:strangely disorganizing writings, which were eagerly read by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50056:unfortunate. Some of these publications, odd to say, which were
tests/les_miserables.txt:50057:patronized by a prince, are to be found in the Secret Library. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:50058:facts, significant but unknown, were imperceptible on the surface.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50059:Sometimes, in the very obscurity of a fact lurks its danger. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:50060:obscure because it is underhand. Of all these writers, the one who
tests/les_miserables.txt:50061:probably then excavated in the masses the most unhealthy gallery was
tests/les_miserables.txt:50064:This work, peculiar to the whole of Europe, effected more ravages in
tests/les_miserables.txt:50066:up by Schiller in his famous drama _The Robbers_, theft and pillage
tests/les_miserables.txt:50067:rose up in protest against property and labor, assimilated certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:50068:specious and false elementary ideas, which, though just in appearance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50070:disappeared within them, after a fashion, assumed an abstract name,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50071:passed into the state of theory, and in that shape circulated among the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50073:chemists who had prepared the mixture, unknown even to the masses who
tests/les_miserables.txt:50074:accepted it. Whenever a fact of this sort presents itself, the case is
tests/les_miserables.txt:50075:grave. Suffering engenders wrath; and while the prosperous classes
tests/les_miserables.txt:50076:blind themselves or fall asleep, which is the same thing as shutting
tests/les_miserables.txt:50077:one’s eyes, the hatred of the unfortunate classes lights its torch at
tests/les_miserables.txt:50078:some aggrieved or ill-made spirit which dreams in a corner, and sets
tests/les_miserables.txt:50079:itself to the scrutiny of society. The scrutiny of hatred is a terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:50082:Hence, if the ill-fortune of the times so wills it, those fearful
tests/les_miserables.txt:50083:commotions which were formerly called _jacqueries_, beside which purely
tests/les_miserables.txt:50084:political agitations are the merest child’s play, which are no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:50085:the conflict of the oppressed and the oppressor, but the revolt of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50086:discomfort against comfort. Then everything crumbles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50088:Jacqueries are earthquakes of the people.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50090:It is this peril, possibly imminent towards the close of the eighteenth
tests/les_miserables.txt:50091:century, which the French Revolution, that immense act of probity, cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:50094:The French Revolution, which is nothing else than the idea armed with
tests/les_miserables.txt:50095:the sword, rose erect, and, with the same abrupt movement, closed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50099:rendered the century healthy, crowned the populace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50101:It may be said of it that it created man a second time, by giving him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50102:second soul, the right.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50104:The nineteenth century has inherited and profited by its work, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50105:to-day, the social catastrophe to which we lately alluded is simply
tests/les_miserables.txt:50106:impossible. Blind is he who announces it! Foolish is he who fears it!
tests/les_miserables.txt:50107:Revolution is the vaccine of Jacquerie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50109:Thanks to the Revolution, social conditions have changed. Feudal and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50110:monarchical maladies no longer run in our blood. There is no more of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50111:the Middle Ages in our constitution. We no longer live in the days when
tests/les_miserables.txt:50113:the obscure course of a dull rumble, when indescribable elevations from
tests/les_miserables.txt:50114:mole-like tunnels appeared on the surface of civilization, where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50115:soil cracked open, where the roofs of caverns yawned, and where one
tests/les_miserables.txt:50118:The revolutionary sense is a moral sense. The sentiment of right, once
tests/les_miserables.txt:50120:which ends where the liberty of others begins, according to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50121:Robespierre’s admirable definition. Since ’89, the whole people has
tests/les_miserables.txt:50124:within him the honesty of France; the dignity of the citizen is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:50125:internal armor; he who is free is scrupulous; he who votes reigns.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50126:Hence incorruptibility; hence the miscarriage of unhealthy lusts; hence
tests/les_miserables.txt:50127:eyes heroically lowered before temptations. The revolutionary
tests/les_miserables.txt:50128:wholesomeness is such, that on a day of deliverance, a 14th of July, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50129:10th of August, there is no longer any populace. The first cry of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50130:enlightened and increasing throngs is: death to thieves! Progress is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:50131:honest man; the ideal and the absolute do not filch
tests/les_miserables.txt:50132:pocket-handkerchiefs. By whom were the wagons containing the wealth of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50133:the Tuileries escorted in 1848? By the rag-pickers of the Faubourg
tests/les_miserables.txt:50135:these tatterdemalions resplendent. In those wagons in chests, hardly
tests/les_miserables.txt:50136:closed, and some, even, half-open, amid a hundred dazzling caskets, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:50137:that ancient crown of France, studded with diamonds, surmounted by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50138:carbuncle of royalty, by the Regent diamond, which was worth thirty
tests/les_miserables.txt:50139:millions. Barefooted, they guarded that crown.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50141:Hence, no more Jacquerie. I regret it for the sake of the skilful. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:50142:old fear has produced its last effects in that quarter; and henceforth
tests/les_miserables.txt:50143:it can no longer be employed in politics. The principal spring of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50144:red spectre is broken. Every one knows it now. The scare-crow scares no
tests/les_miserables.txt:50145:longer. The birds take liberties with the mannikin, foul creatures
tests/les_miserables.txt:50154:This being the case, is all social danger dispelled? Certainly not.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50155:There is no Jacquerie; society may rest assured on that point; blood
tests/les_miserables.txt:50156:will no longer rush to its head. But let society take heed to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50157:manner in which it breathes. Apoplexy is no longer to be feared, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:50158:phthisis is there. Social phthisis is called misery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50160:One can perish from being undermined as well as from being struck by
tests/les_miserables.txt:50163:Let us not weary of repeating, and sympathetic souls must not forget
tests/les_miserables.txt:50165:must understand that the first of political necessities consists in
tests/les_miserables.txt:50167:solacing, airing, enlightening, loving them, in enlarging their horizon
tests/les_miserables.txt:50168:to a magnificent extent, in lavishing upon them education in every
tests/les_miserables.txt:50172:limit to wealth, in creating vast fields of public and popular
tests/les_miserables.txt:50173:activity, in having, like Briareus, a hundred hands to extend in all
tests/les_miserables.txt:50174:directions to the oppressed and the feeble, in employing the collective
tests/les_miserables.txt:50175:power for that grand duty of opening workshops for all arms, schools
tests/les_miserables.txt:50176:for all aptitudes, and laboratories for all degrees of intelligence, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:50177:augmenting salaries, diminishing trouble, balancing what should be and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50179:glut to need; in a word, in evolving from the social apparatus more
tests/les_miserables.txt:50180:light and more comfort for the benefit of those who suffer and those
tests/les_miserables.txt:50184:this: labor cannot be a law without being a right.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50186:We will not insist upon this point; this is not the proper place for
tests/les_miserables.txt:50189:If nature calls itself Providence, society should call itself
tests/les_miserables.txt:50192:Intellectual and moral growth is no less indispensable than material
tests/les_miserables.txt:50193:improvement. To know is a sacrament, to think is the prime necessity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50194:truth is nourishment as well as grain. A reason which fasts from
tests/les_miserables.txt:50195:science and wisdom grows thin. Let us enter equal complaint against
tests/les_miserables.txt:50196:stomachs and minds which do not eat. If there is anything more
tests/les_miserables.txt:50197:heart-breaking than a body perishing for lack of bread, it is a soul
tests/les_miserables.txt:50198:which is dying from hunger for the light.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50200:The whole of progress tends in the direction of solution. Some day we
tests/les_miserables.txt:50201:shall be amazed. As the human race mounts upward, the deep layers
tests/les_miserables.txt:50203:will be accomplished by a simple elevation of level.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50205:We should do wrong were we to doubt this blessed consummation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50208:censures. This rejuvenation of a corpse is surprising. Behold, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:50209:walking and advancing. It seems a victor; this dead body is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50210:conqueror. He arrives with his legions, superstitions, with his sword,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50211:despotism, with his banner, ignorance; a while ago, he won ten battles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50212:He advances, he threatens, he laughs, he is at our doors. Let us not
tests/les_miserables.txt:50213:despair, on our side. Let us sell the field on which Hannibal is
tests/les_miserables.txt:50214:encamped.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50218:No such thing as a back-flow of ideas exists any more than there exists
tests/les_miserables.txt:50219:a return of a river on its course.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50221:But let those who do not desire a future reflect on this matter. When
tests/les_miserables.txt:50223:they are condemning. They are giving themselves a sad malady; they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:50224:inoculating themselves with the past. There is but one way of rejecting
tests/les_miserables.txt:50233:Yes, the people, sketched out by the eighteenth century, will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:50238:Immense combined propulsions direct human affairs and conduct them
tests/les_miserables.txt:50239:within a given time to a logical state, that is to say, to a state of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50240:equilibrium; that is to say, to equity. A force composed of earth and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50241:heaven results from humanity and governs it; this force is a worker of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50242:miracles; marvellous issues are no more difficult to it than
tests/les_miserables.txt:50243:extraordinary vicissitudes. Aided by science, which comes from one man,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50244:and by the event, which comes from another, it is not greatly alarmed
tests/les_miserables.txt:50245:by these contradictions in the attitude of problems, which seem
tests/les_miserables.txt:50246:impossibilities to the vulgar herd. It is no less skilful at causing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50247:solution to spring forth from the reconciliation of ideas, than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50248:lesson from the reconciliation of facts, and we may expect anything
tests/les_miserables.txt:50249:from that mysterious power of progress, which brought the Orient and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50250:the Occident face to face one fine day, in the depths of a sepulchre,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50251:and made the imaums converse with Bonaparte in the interior of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50255:grandiose onward march of minds. Social philosophy consists essentially
tests/les_miserables.txt:50256:in science and peace. Its object is, and its result must be, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50258:scrutinizes, it analyzes; then it puts together once more, it proceeds
tests/les_miserables.txt:50259:by means of reduction, discarding all hatred.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50261:More than once, a society has been seen to give way before the wind
tests/les_miserables.txt:50262:which is let loose upon mankind; history is full of the shipwrecks of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50263:nations and empires; manners, customs, laws, religions,—and some fine
tests/les_miserables.txt:50264:day that unknown force, the hurricane, passes by and bears them all
tests/les_miserables.txt:50265:away. The civilizations of India, of Chaldea, of Persia, of Syria, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50267:the causes of these disasters? We do not know. Could these societies
tests/les_miserables.txt:50268:have been saved? Was it their fault? Did they persist in the fatal vice
tests/les_miserables.txt:50269:which destroyed them? What is the amount of suicide in these terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:50270:deaths of a nation and a race? Questions to which there exists no
tests/les_miserables.txt:50271:reply. Darkness enwraps condemned civilizations. They sprung a leak,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50273:terror that we look on, at the bottom of that sea which is called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50274:past, behind those colossal waves, at the shipwreck of those immense
tests/les_miserables.txt:50276:gusts which emerge from all the mouths of the shadows. But shadows are
tests/les_miserables.txt:50277:there, and light is here. We are not acquainted with the maladies of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50278:these ancient civilizations, we do not know the infirmities of our own.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50279:Everywhere upon it we have the right of light, we contemplate its
tests/les_miserables.txt:50280:beauties, we lay bare its defects. Where it is ill, we probe; and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50281:sickness once diagnosed, the study of the cause leads to the discovery
tests/les_miserables.txt:50282:of the remedy. Our civilization, the work of twenty centuries, is its
tests/les_miserables.txt:50284:saved. It is already much to have solaced it; its enlightenment is yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:50285:another point. All the labors of modern social philosophies must
tests/les_miserables.txt:50286:converge towards this point. The thinker of to-day has a great duty—to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50287:auscultate civilization.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50289:We repeat, that this auscultation brings encouragement; it is by this
tests/les_miserables.txt:50290:persistence in encouragement that we wish to conclude these pages, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:50291:austere interlude in a mournful drama. Beneath the social mortality, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:50292:feel human imperishableness. The globe does not perish, because it has
tests/les_miserables.txt:50293:these wounds, craters, eruptions, sulphur pits, here and there, nor
tests/les_miserables.txt:50294:because of a volcano which ejects its pus. The maladies of the people
tests/les_miserables.txt:50297:And yet, any one who follows the course of social clinics shakes his
tests/les_miserables.txt:50298:head at times. The strongest, the tenderest, the most logical have
tests/les_miserables.txt:50302:question, when we behold so much terrible darkness. Melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:50303:face-to-face encounter of selfish and wretched. On the part of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50304:selfish, the prejudices, shadows of costly education, appetite
tests/les_miserables.txt:50305:increasing through intoxication, a giddiness of prosperity which dulls,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50306:a fear of suffering which, in some, goes as far as an aversion for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50307:suffering, an implacable satisfaction, the _I_ so swollen that it bars
tests/les_miserables.txt:50308:the soul; on the side of the wretched covetousness, envy, hatred of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50311:impure and simple ignorance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50313:Shall we continue to raise our eyes to heaven? is the luminous point
tests/les_miserables.txt:50314:which we distinguish there one of those which vanish? The ideal is
tests/les_miserables.txt:50316:imperceptible, brilliant, but surrounded by those great, black menaces,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50318:maw of the clouds.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50331:The reader has probably understood that Éponine, having recognized
tests/les_miserables.txt:50334:and had then conducted Marius thither, and that, after many days spent
tests/les_miserables.txt:50335:in ecstasy before that gate, Marius, drawn on by that force which draws
tests/les_miserables.txt:50336:the iron to the magnet and a lover towards the stones of which is built
tests/les_miserables.txt:50339:than for Romeo; Romeo was obliged to scale a wall, Marius had only to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50340:use a little force on one of the bars of the decrepit gate which
tests/les_miserables.txt:50341:vacillated in its rusty recess, after the fashion of old people’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:50345:the garden except at night, he ran no risk of being seen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50349:existence, Cosette had fallen in love with a man in the least
tests/les_miserables.txt:50350:unscrupulous or debauched, she would have been lost; for there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:50351:generous natures which yield themselves, and Cosette was one of them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50353:is absolute, is complicated with some indescribably celestial blindness
tests/les_miserables.txt:50356:it in the gloom with a shudder. Love has no middle course; it either
tests/les_miserables.txt:50360:coffin. The same sentiment says “yes” and “no” in the human heart. Of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50361:all the things that God has made, the human heart is the one which
tests/les_miserables.txt:50364:God willed that Cosette’s love should encounter one of the loves which
tests/les_miserables.txt:50368:there, in every night, in that poor, neglected garden, beneath that
tests/les_miserables.txt:50369:thicket which grew thicker and more fragrant day by day, two beings
tests/les_miserables.txt:50370:composed of all chastity, all innocence, overflowing with all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50371:felicity of heaven, nearer to the archangels than to mankind, pure,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50372:honest, intoxicated, radiant, who shone for each other amid the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50373:shadows. It seemed to Cosette that Marius had a crown, and to Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:50374:that Cosette had a nimbus. They touched each other, they gazed at each
tests/les_miserables.txt:50375:other, they clasped each other’s hands, they pressed close to each
tests/les_miserables.txt:50376:other; but there was a distance which they did not pass. Not that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:50377:respected it; they did not know of its existence. Marius was conscious
tests/les_miserables.txt:50378:of a barrier, Cosette’s innocence; and Cosette of a support, Marius’
tests/les_miserables.txt:50379:loyalty. The first kiss had also been the last. Marius, since that
tests/les_miserables.txt:50380:time, had not gone further than to touch Cosette’s hand, or her
tests/les_miserables.txt:50381:kerchief, or a lock of her hair, with his lips. For him, Cosette was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50384:in this ecstatic state which can be described as the dazzling of one
tests/les_miserables.txt:50385:soul by another soul. It was the ineffable first embrace of two maiden
tests/les_miserables.txt:50389:beneath the omnipotence of ecstasy, Marius, the pure and seraphic
tests/les_miserables.txt:50391:Cosette’s robe to the height of her ankle. Once, in the moonlight,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50392:Cosette stooped to pick up something on the ground, her bodice fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:50396:What took place between these two beings? Nothing. They adored each
tests/les_miserables.txt:50400:sacred spot. All flowers unfolded around them and sent them incense;
tests/les_miserables.txt:50401:and they opened their souls and scattered them over the flowers. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:50403:intoxication, around these two innocents, and they uttered words of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50404:love which set the trees to trembling.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50406:What words were these? Breaths. Nothing more. These breaths sufficed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50407:trouble and to touch all nature round about. Magic power which we
tests/les_miserables.txt:50408:should find it difficult to understand were we to read in a book these
tests/les_miserables.txt:50409:conversations which are made to be borne away and dispersed like smoke
tests/les_miserables.txt:50411:two lovers that melody which proceeds from the soul and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:50412:accompanies them like a lyre, and what remains is nothing more than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50413:shade; you say: “What! is that all!” eh! yes, childish prattle,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50415:and most sublime in the world! The only things which are worth the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50419:absurdities, these paltry remarks, is an imbecile and a malicious
tests/les_miserables.txt:50425:[In all this and athwart this celestial maidenliness, and without
tests/les_miserables.txt:50426:either of them being able to say how it had come about, they had begun
tests/les_miserables.txt:50427:to call each other _thou_.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:50454:grove situated in heaven. On another occasion she gazed intently at him
tests/les_miserables.txt:50455:and exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:50458:are not at all stupid, you are much more learned than I am, but I bid
tests/les_miserables.txt:50459:you defiance with this word: I love you!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:50465:Or she bestowed on him a gentle tap because he coughed, and she said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50468:“Don’t cough, sir; I will not have people cough on my domain without my
tests/les_miserables.txt:50469:permission. It’s very naughty to cough and to disturb me. I want you to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50470:be well, because, in the first place, if you were not well, I should be
tests/les_miserables.txt:50476:Once Marius said to Cosette:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:50483:In the middle of another conversation, he chanced to exclaim:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:50488:impossible. This bordered on a strange theme, the flesh, before which
tests/les_miserables.txt:50489:that immense and innocent love recoiled with a sort of sacred fright.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50491:Marius pictured life with Cosette to himself like this, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:50492:anything else; to come every evening to the Rue Plumet, to displace the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50493:old and accommodating bar of the chief-justice’s gate, to sit elbow to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50494:elbow on that bench, to gaze through the trees at the scintillation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50495:the on-coming night, to fit a fold of the knee of his trousers into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50496:ample fall of Cosette’s gown, to caress her thumb-nail, to call her
tests/les_miserables.txt:50498:indefinitely. During this time, clouds passed above their heads. Every
tests/les_miserables.txt:50500:than of the clouds of heaven.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50502:This chaste, almost shy love was not devoid of gallantry, by any means.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50503:To pay compliments to the woman whom a man loves is the first method of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50504:bestowing caresses, and he is half audacious who tries it. A compliment
tests/les_miserables.txt:50506:with its sweet tiny point, while it hides itself. The heart draws back
tests/les_miserables.txt:50508:saturated with fancy, were, so to speak, of azure hue. The birds when
tests/les_miserables.txt:50509:they fly up yonder, in the direction of the angels, must hear such
tests/les_miserables.txt:50511:the positiveness of which Marius was capable. It was what is said in
tests/les_miserables.txt:50512:the bower, a prelude to what will be said in the chamber; a lyrical
tests/les_miserables.txt:50514:cooing, all the refinements of adoration arranged in a bouquet and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50515:exhaling a celestial perfume, an ineffable twitter of heart to heart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50518:It is all over with me when I contemplate you. You are a grace. I know
tests/les_miserables.txt:50520:your shoe peeps from beneath, upsets me. And then, what an enchanted
tests/les_miserables.txt:50524:charming! I am really beside myself. You are adorable, Mademoiselle. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:50525:study your feet with the microscope and your soul with the telescope.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:50530:“I have been loving a little more all the time that has passed since
tests/les_miserables.txt:50534:Questions and replies took care of themselves in this dialogue, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:50535:always turned with mutual consent upon love, as the little pith figures
tests/les_miserables.txt:50538:Cosette’s whole person was ingenuousness, ingenuity, transparency,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50539:whiteness, candor, radiance. It might have been said of Cosette that
tests/les_miserables.txt:50540:she was clear. She produced on those who saw her the sensation of April
tests/les_miserables.txt:50541:and dawn. There was dew in her eyes. Cosette was a condensation of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50544:It was quite simple that Marius should admire her, since he adored her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50545:But the truth is, that this little school-girl, fresh from the convent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50547:true and delicate sayings. Her prattle was conversation. She never made
tests/les_miserables.txt:50549:and speaks with the tender instinct of the heart, which is infallible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50552:once, both sweet and deep. Sweetness and depth, they are the whole of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50555:In this full felicity, tears welled up to their eyes every instant. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:50556:crushed lady-bug, a feather fallen from a nest, a branch of hawthorn
tests/les_miserables.txt:50557:broken, aroused their pity, and their ecstasy, sweetly mingled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:50558:melancholy, seemed to ask nothing better than to weep. The most
tests/les_miserables.txt:50562:And, in addition to this,—all these contradictions are the lightning
tests/les_miserables.txt:50564:a delicious freedom, and so familiarly that they sometimes presented
tests/les_miserables.txt:50567:Still, though unknown to hearts intoxicated with purity, nature is
tests/les_miserables.txt:50569:and sublime object; and however great may be the innocence of souls,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50571:mysterious shade which separates a couple of lovers from a pair of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50574:They idolized each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50577:smile, they laugh, they make little grimaces with the tips of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:50578:lips, they interlace their fingers, they call each other _thou_, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50582:invisible, with the birds, with the roses; they fascinate each other in
tests/les_miserables.txt:50583:the darkness with their hearts which they throw into their eyes, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:50594:notice the cholera which decimated Paris precisely during that very
tests/les_miserables.txt:50595:month. They had confided in each other as far as possible, but this had
tests/les_miserables.txt:50596:not extended much further than their names. Marius had told Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:50597:that he was an orphan, that his name was Marius Pontmercy, that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:50599:father had been a colonel, that the latter had been a hero, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:50600:he, Marius, was on bad terms with his grandfather who was rich. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:50601:also hinted at being a baron, but this had produced no effect on
tests/les_miserables.txt:50603:On her side, she had confided to him that she had been brought up at
tests/les_miserables.txt:50604:the Petit-Picpus convent, that her mother, like his own, was dead, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:50605:her father’s name was M. Fauchelevent, that he was very good, that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:50609:Strange to say, in the sort of symphony which Marius had lived since he
tests/les_miserables.txt:50610:had been in the habit of seeing Cosette, the past, even the most recent
tests/les_miserables.txt:50611:past, had become so confused and distant to him, that what Cosette told
tests/les_miserables.txt:50612:him satisfied him completely. It did not even occur to him to tell her
tests/les_miserables.txt:50613:about the nocturnal adventure in the hovel, about Thénardier, about the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50617:breakfasted, nor who had spoken to him; he had songs in his ears which
tests/les_miserables.txt:50621:of immaterial pleasures. Thus lived these somnambulists who are called
tests/les_miserables.txt:50625:come an hour when one emerges from this azure, and why does life go on
tests/les_miserables.txt:50628:Loving almost takes the place of thinking. Love is an ardent
tests/les_miserables.txt:50629:forgetfulness of all the rest. Then ask logic of passion if you will.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50630:There is no more absolute logical sequence in the human heart than
tests/les_miserables.txt:50631:there is a perfect geometrical figure in the celestial mechanism. For
tests/les_miserables.txt:50632:Cosette and Marius nothing existed except Marius and Cosette. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:50635:occurred to Marius that Cosette had a father. His brain was dazzled and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50638:sorts of important things. They had told each other everything except
tests/les_miserables.txt:50641:And was he very sure that this nightmare had actually existed? They
tests/les_miserables.txt:50642:were two, and they adored each other, and beyond that there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:50646:know. A rosy cloud hangs over it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50649:improbability which is in nature; neither at the nadir nor at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50651:the clouds; hardly flesh and blood, soul and ecstasy from head to foot;
tests/les_miserables.txt:50652:already too sublime to walk the earth, still too heavily charged with
tests/les_miserables.txt:50653:humanity to disappear in the blue, suspended like atoms which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:50654:waiting to be precipitated; apparently beyond the bounds of destiny;
tests/les_miserables.txt:50656:floating, soaring; at times so light that they could take their flight
tests/les_miserables.txt:50662:presence. The best way to look at the soul is through closed eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50665:them. They considered that they had already arrived. It is a strange
tests/les_miserables.txt:50666:claim on man’s part to wish that love should lead to something.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50674:Jean Valjean suspected nothing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50677:sufficed for Jean Valjean’s happiness. The thoughts which Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:50678:cherished, her tender preoccupations, Marius’ image which filled her
tests/les_miserables.txt:50679:heart, took away nothing from the incomparable purity of her beautiful,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50680:chaste, and smiling brow. She was at the age when the virgin bears her
tests/les_miserables.txt:50682:two lovers have come to an understanding, things always go well; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50683:third party who might disturb their love is kept in a state of perfect
tests/les_miserables.txt:50684:blindness by a restricted number of precautions which are always the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50685:same in the case of all lovers. Thus, Cosette never objected to any of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50689:bed at ten o’clock, Marius did not come to the garden on such occasions
tests/les_miserables.txt:50691:long glass door on the veranda. Of course, no one ever met Marius in
tests/les_miserables.txt:50693:in existence. Only once, one morning, he chanced to say to Cosette:
tests/les_miserables.txt:50694:“Why, you have whitewash on your back!” On the previous evening,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50701:themselves in a recess near the steps, in order that they might neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:50703:contenting themselves, by way of conversation, with pressing each
tests/les_miserables.txt:50704:other’s hands twenty times a minute as they gazed at the branches of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50705:the trees. At such times, a thunderbolt might have fallen thirty paces
tests/les_miserables.txt:50706:from them, and they would not have noticed it, so deeply was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50710:is a recollection of lily petals and the plumage of the dove.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50713:time that Marius entered and left, he carefully adjusted the bar of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50714:gate in such a manner that no displacement was visible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50716:He usually went away about midnight, and returned to Courfeyrac’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:50717:lodgings. Courfeyrac said to Bahorel:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:50719:“Would you believe it? Marius comes home nowadays at one o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50725:“What do you expect? There’s always a petard in a seminary fellow.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:50728:At times, Courfeyrac folded his arms, assumed a serious air, and said
tests/les_miserables.txt:50734:Courfeyrac, being a practical man, did not take in good part this
tests/les_miserables.txt:50735:reflection of an invisible paradise upon Marius; he was not much in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50736:habit of concealed passions; it made him impatient, and now and then he
tests/les_miserables.txt:50737:called upon Marius to come back to reality.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50741:“My dear fellow, you produce upon me the effect of being located in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50742:moon, the realm of dreams, the province of illusions, capital,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50746:But nothing could induce Marius “to talk.” They might have torn out his
tests/les_miserables.txt:50747:nails before one of the two sacred syllables of which that ineffable
tests/les_miserables.txt:50748:name, Cosette, was composed. True love is as luminous as the dawn and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50749:as silent as the tomb. Only, Courfeyrac saw this change in Marius, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:50750:his taciturnity was of the beaming order.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50757:opera called love, the libretto counts for almost nothing;
tests/les_miserables.txt:50759:For Marius, to listen to Cosette discussing finery;
tests/les_miserables.txt:50761:For Cosette, to listen to Marius talk in politics;
tests/les_miserables.txt:50763:To listen, knee pressed to knee, to the carriages rolling along the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:50766:To gaze upon the same planet in space, or at the same glowworm gleaming
tests/les_miserables.txt:50769:To hold their peace together; a still greater delight than
tests/les_miserables.txt:50770:conversation;
tests/les_miserables.txt:50772:Etc., etc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50774:In the meantime, divers complications were approaching.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50778:was on the point of turning the corner of the Rue Plumet, he heard some
tests/les_miserables.txt:50779:one quite close to him say:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:50784:He raised his head and recognized Éponine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50786:This produced a singular effect upon him. He had not thought of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:50787:girl a single time since the day when she had conducted him to the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:50788:Plumet, he had not seen her again, and she had gone completely out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:50794:man to a state of perfection; it simply leads him, as we have noted, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50799:not even clearly put it to himself that this Éponine was named Éponine
tests/les_miserables.txt:50800:Thénardier, and that she bore the name inscribed in his father’s will,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50801:that name, for which, but a few months before, he would have so
tests/les_miserables.txt:50802:ardently sacrificed himself. We show Marius as he was. His father
tests/les_miserables.txt:50811:“Why do you call me _you?_ Have I done anything to you?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:50817:he could not do otherwise, now that he used _thou_ to Cosette, than say
tests/les_miserables.txt:50820:As he remained silent, she exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:50825:Then she paused. It seemed as though words failed that creature
tests/les_miserables.txt:50826:formerly so heedless and so bold. She tried to smile and could not.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50832:Then she paused again, and remained with downcast eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50843:The following day was the 3d of June, 1832, a date which it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:50844:necessary to indicate on account of the grave events which at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:50845:epoch hung on the horizon of Paris in the state of lightning-charged
tests/les_miserables.txt:50846:clouds. Marius, at nightfall, was pursuing the same road as on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50847:preceding evening, with the same thoughts of delight in his heart, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:50848:he caught sight of Éponine approaching, through the trees of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50849:boulevard. Two days in succession—this was too much. He turned hastily
tests/les_miserables.txt:50850:aside, quitted the boulevard, changed his course and went to the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:50853:This caused Éponine to follow him to the Rue Plumet, a thing which she
tests/les_miserables.txt:50854:had not yet done. Up to that time, she had contented herself with
tests/les_miserables.txt:50855:watching him on his passage along the boulevard without ever seeking to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50856:encounter him. It was only on the evening before that she had attempted
tests/les_miserables.txt:50859:So Éponine followed him, without his suspecting the fact. She saw him
tests/les_miserables.txt:50860:displace the bar and slip into the garden.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50862:She approached the railing, felt of the bars one after the other, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50863:readily recognized the one which Marius had moved.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50865:She murmured in a low voice and in gloomy accents:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:50870:She seated herself on the underpinning of the railing, close beside the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50871:bar, as though she were guarding it. It was precisely at the point
tests/les_miserables.txt:50872:where the railing touched the neighboring wall. There was a dim nook
tests/les_miserables.txt:50873:there, in which Éponine was entirely concealed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50878:Towards ten o’clock in the evening, one of the two or three persons who
tests/les_miserables.txt:50880:haste to escape from this deserted spot of evil repute, as he skirted
tests/les_miserables.txt:50881:the garden railings and reached the angle which it made with the wall,
tests/les_miserables.txt:50882:heard a dull and threatening voice saying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:50884:“I’m no longer surprised that he comes here every evening.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:50887:The passer-by cast a glance around him, saw no one, dared not peer into
tests/les_miserables.txt:50888:the black niche, and was greatly alarmed. He redoubled his pace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50891:six men, who were marching separately and at some distance from each
tests/les_miserables.txt:50896:others; a second later, all six were reunited.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50898:These men began to talk in a low voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50900:“This is the place,” said one of them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50902:“Is there a _cab_ [dog] in the garden?” asked another.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50904:“I don’t know. In any case, I have fetched a ball that we’ll make him
tests/les_miserables.txt:50914:“The railing is old,” interpolated a fifth, who had the voice of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50917:“So much the better,” said the second who had spoken. “It won’t screech
tests/les_miserables.txt:50918:under the saw, and it won’t be hard to cut.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:50921:The sixth, who had not yet opened his lips, now began to inspect the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50922:gate, as Éponine had done an hour earlier, grasping each bar in
tests/les_miserables.txt:50923:succession, and shaking them cautiously.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50925:Thus he came to the bar which Marius had loosened. As he was on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50928:the middle of his breast, and a hoarse voice said to him, but not
tests/les_miserables.txt:50934:At the same moment, he perceived a pale girl standing before him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50936:The man underwent that shock which the unexpected always brings. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:50938:ferocious beasts who are uneasy; their terrified air evokes terror.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50940:He recoiled and stammered:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:50948:It was, in fact, Éponine, who had addressed Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50952:drawn near, without precipitation, without uttering a word, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:50953:sinister slowness peculiar to these men of the night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50955:Some indescribable but hideous tools were visible in their hands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50956:Guelemer held one of those pairs of curved pincers which prowlers call
tests/les_miserables.txt:50957:_fanchons_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50960:you crazy?” exclaimed Thénardier, as loudly as one can exclaim and
tests/les_miserables.txt:50961:still speak low; “what have you come here to hinder our work for?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:50964:Éponine burst out laughing, and threw herself on his neck.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50966:“I am here, little father, because I am here. Isn’t a person allowed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:50968:have you come here for, since it’s a biscuit? I told Magnon so. There’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:50969:nothing to be done here. But embrace me, my good little father! It’s a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50970:long time since I’ve seen you! So you’re out?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:50976:“That’s good. You’ve embraced me. Yes, I’m out. I’m not in. Now, get
tests/les_miserables.txt:50980:But Éponine did not release her hold, and redoubled her caresses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:50982:“But how did you manage it, little pa? You must have been very clever
tests/les_miserables.txt:50992:“I won’t go, so there now,” pouted Éponine like a spoiled child; “you
tests/les_miserables.txt:50993:send me off, and it’s four months since I saw you, and I’ve hardly had
tests/les_miserables.txt:50997:And she caught her father round the neck again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51001:“Make haste!” said Guelemer, “the cops may pass.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51004:The ventriloquist’s voice repeated his distich:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51007:    A bécoter papa, maman.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51010:    To peck at pa and ma.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51020:“Yes, they know you!” ejaculated Thénardier. “But good day, good
tests/les_miserables.txt:51024:“It’s the hour for foxes, not for chickens,” said Montparnasse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51028:Éponine caught Montparnasse’s hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51030:“Take care,” said he, “you’ll cut yourself, I’ve a knife open.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51034:confidence in people. I am the daughter of my father, perhaps. Monsieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:51035:Babet, Monsieur Guelemer, I’m the person who was charged to investigate
tests/les_miserables.txt:51040:had become impossible to her since she had known Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51043:Guelemer’s huge, coarse fingers, and continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51046:rendered you service on various occasions. Well, I have made inquiries;
tests/les_miserables.txt:51056:“The candles haven’t, anyway!” ejaculated Babet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51058:And he pointed out to Éponine, across the tops of the trees, a light
tests/les_miserables.txt:51059:which was wandering about in the mansard roof of the pavilion. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:51068:“Go to the devil!” cried Thénardier. “When we’ve turned the house
tests/les_miserables.txt:51069:upside down and put the cellar at the top and the attic below, we’ll
tests/les_miserables.txt:51070:tell you what there is inside, and whether it’s francs or sous or
tests/les_miserables.txt:51080:“Take care, you’ll cut yourself,” replied Montparnasse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51082:Thénardier resumed in his decided tone:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51084:“Decamp, my girl, and leave men to their own affairs!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51087:Éponine released Montparnasse’s hand, which she had grasped again, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51095:Then she set her back against the gate, faced the six ruffians who were
tests/les_miserables.txt:51097:and said in a firm, low voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51106:the first place, if you enter this garden, if you lay a hand on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:51107:gate, I’ll scream, I’ll beat on the door, I’ll rouse everybody, I’ll
tests/les_miserables.txt:51108:have the whole six of you seized, I’ll call the police.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51121:“Not so close, my good man!” said she.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51130:“Bitch!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51136:dog, since I’m the daughter of a wolf. There are six of you, what
tests/les_miserables.txt:51138:me. I tell you that you shan’t enter this house, because it doesn’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:51139:suit me. If you approach, I’ll bark. I told you, I’m the dog, and I
tests/les_miserables.txt:51140:don’t care a straw for you. Go your way, you bore me! Go where you
tests/les_miserables.txt:51141:please, but don’t come here, I forbid it! You can use your knives. I’ll
tests/les_miserables.txt:51142:use kicks; it’s all the same to me, come on!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51145:She advanced a pace nearer the ruffians, she was terrible, she burst
tests/les_miserables.txt:51149:cold this winter. Aren’t they ridiculous, these ninnies of men, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:51150:think they can scare a girl! What! Scare? Oh, yes, much! Because you
tests/les_miserables.txt:51151:have finical poppets of mistresses who hide under the bed when you put
tests/les_miserables.txt:51152:on a big voice, forsooth! I ain’t afraid of anything, that I ain’t!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51160:Then she continued, as she cast her blood-shot, spectre-like eyes upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:51163:“What do I care if I’m picked up to-morrow morning on the pavement of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51164:the Rue Plumet, killed by the blows of my father’s club, or whether I’m
tests/les_miserables.txt:51166:in the midst of rotten old corks and drowned dogs?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51169:She was forced to pause; she was seized by a dry cough, her breath came
tests/les_miserables.txt:51170:from her weak and narrow chest like the death-rattle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51174:“I have only to cry out, and people will come, and then slap, bang!
tests/les_miserables.txt:51180:“Don’t approach!” she cried.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51184:“Well, no; I won’t approach, but don’t speak so loud. So you intend to
tests/les_miserables.txt:51197:So saying, she seated herself on the underpinning of the fence and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51209:She had set her elbow on her knee and her chin in her hand, and she
tests/les_miserables.txt:51210:swung her foot with an air of indifference. Her tattered gown permitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:51213:more surprising could be seen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51215:The six rascals, speechless and gloomy at being held in check by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51216:girl, retreated beneath the shadow cast by the lantern, and held
tests/les_miserables.txt:51217:counsel with furious and humiliated shrugs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51219:In the meantime she stared at them with a stern but peaceful air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51223:old fellow who lodges in the back-yard, and curtains that ain’t so bad
tests/les_miserables.txt:51224:at the windows. The old cove must be a Jew. I think the job’s a good
tests/les_miserables.txt:51228:“Well, go in, then, the rest of you,” exclaimed Montparnasse. “Do the
tests/les_miserables.txt:51232:He flashed the knife, which he held open in his hand, in the light of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51238:Brujon, who was somewhat of an oracle, and who had, as the reader
tests/les_miserables.txt:51240:He had the reputation of not sticking at anything, and it was known
tests/les_miserables.txt:51241:that he had plundered a police post simply out of bravado. Besides this
tests/les_miserables.txt:51242:he made verses and songs, which gave him great authority.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51250:various ways, and finally concluded to speak:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51252:“See here; this morning I came across two sparrows fighting, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:51261:“Never mind! if they had wanted, I’d have cut her throat.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51269:At the corner of the street they halted and exchanged the following
tests/les_miserables.txt:51270:enigmatical dialogue in a low tone:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51285:road by which they had come. She rose and began to creep after them
tests/les_miserables.txt:51299:tranquil, nocturnal aspect. That which had just taken place in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:51300:street would not have astonished a forest. The lofty trees, the copses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51301:the heaths, the branches rudely interlaced, the tall grass, exist in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51302:sombre manner; the savage swarming there catches glimpses of sudden
tests/les_miserables.txt:51303:apparitions of the invisible; that which is below man distinguishes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51304:through the mists, that which is beyond man; and the things of which we
tests/les_miserables.txt:51305:living beings are ignorant there meet face to face in the night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51306:Nature, bristling and wild, takes alarm at certain approaches in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:51307:she fancies that she feels the supernatural. The forces of the gloom
tests/les_miserables.txt:51308:know each other, and are strangely balanced by each other. Teeth and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51309:claws fear what they cannot grasp. Blood-drinking bestiality, voracious
tests/les_miserables.txt:51310:appetites, hunger in search of prey, the armed instincts of nails and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51311:jaws which have for source and aim the belly, glare and smell out
tests/les_miserables.txt:51312:uneasily the impassive spectral forms straying beneath a shroud, erect
tests/les_miserables.txt:51313:in its vague and shuddering robe, and which seem to them to live with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51314:dead and terrible life. These brutalities, which are only matter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51315:entertain a confused fear of having to deal with the immense obscurity
tests/les_miserables.txt:51316:condensed into an unknown being. A black figure barring the way stops
tests/les_miserables.txt:51317:the wild beast short. That which emerges from the cemetery intimidates
tests/les_miserables.txt:51318:and disconcerts that which emerges from the cave; the ferocious fear
tests/les_miserables.txt:51319:the sinister; wolves recoil when they encounter a ghoul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51328:While this sort of a dog with a human face was mounting guard over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:51332:Never had the sky been more studded with stars and more charming, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:51336:to the inward music of love; never had Marius been more captivated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51337:more happy, more ecstatic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51342:This was the first cloud in that wonderful dream.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51350:Then she had seated herself on the bench near the steps, and while he
tests/les_miserables.txt:51351:tremblingly took his place beside her, she had continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51353:“My father told me this morning to hold myself in readiness, because he
tests/les_miserables.txt:51363:degrees, taken possession of Cosette each day. As we have already
tests/les_miserables.txt:51364:explained, in the case of first love, the soul is taken long before the
tests/les_miserables.txt:51367:“Because there is none”; but the sarcasm is, fortunately, a blasphemy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51369:with all his soul, and seized her jealously with incredible conviction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51370:He possessed her smile, her breath, her perfume, the profound radiance
tests/les_miserables.txt:51371:of her blue eyes, the sweetness of her skin when he touched her hand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51372:the charming mark which she had on her neck, all her thoughts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51375:He incessantly gazed at, and he sometimes touched lightly with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:51376:breath, the short locks on the nape of her neck, and he declared to
tests/les_miserables.txt:51377:himself that there was not one of those short hairs which did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:51380:cuffs, as sacred objects of which he was the master. He dreamed that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:51381:was the lord of those pretty shell combs which she wore in her hair,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51382:and he even said to himself, in confused and suppressed stammerings of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51383:voluptuousness which did not make their way to the light, that there
tests/les_miserables.txt:51384:was not a ribbon of her gown, not a mesh in her stockings, not a fold
tests/les_miserables.txt:51385:in her bodice, which was not his. Beside Cosette he felt himself beside
tests/les_miserables.txt:51389:back again.—“This is mine.” “No, it is mine.” “I assure you that you
tests/les_miserables.txt:51392:was something which made a part of Marius. Marius felt Cosette within
tests/les_miserables.txt:51395:this intoxication, of this virgin possession, unprecedented and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51397:fell suddenly, at a blow, and that the harsh voice of reality cried to
tests/les_miserables.txt:51402:outside of life; those words, _going away!_ caused him to re-enter it
tests/les_miserables.txt:51406:cold. She said to him in her turn: “What is the matter?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51419:that it is necessary to have a large trunk for me and a small one for
tests/les_miserables.txt:51424:“But this is outrageous!” exclaimed Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51426:It is certain, that, at that moment, no abuse of power, no violence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51427:not one of the abominations of the worst tyrants, no action of Busiris,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51428:of Tiberius, or of Henry VIII., could have equalled this in atrocity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51429:in the opinion of Marius; M. Fauchelevent taking his daughter off to
tests/les_miserables.txt:51430:England because he had business there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51432:He demanded in a weak voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51446:Marius rose and said coldly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51466:“What do you expect me to do?” she said, clasping her hands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51483:turned so pale that her face shone white through the gloom. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:51494:woman whom one loves possesses a visible radiance, even at night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51506:Marius was now a thoroughly roused man. He had fallen back into
tests/les_miserables.txt:51507:reality. He cried to Cosette:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51511:much, more than ten louis to Courfeyrac, one of my friends with whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:51512:you are not acquainted! I have an old hat which is not worth three
tests/les_miserables.txt:51513:francs, I have a coat which lacks buttons in front, my shirt is all
tests/les_miserables.txt:51521:He threw himself against a tree which was close at hand, erect, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:51522:brow pressed close to the bark, feeling neither the wood which flayed
tests/les_miserables.txt:51523:his skin, nor the fever which was throbbing in his temples, and there
tests/les_miserables.txt:51527:He remained a long time thus. One could remain for eternity in such
tests/les_miserables.txt:51529:noise, which was sweet yet sad.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51536:He came to her, fell at her knees, and slowly prostrating himself, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:51537:took the tip of her foot which peeped out from beneath her robe, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51540:She let him have his way in silence. There are moments when a woman
tests/les_miserables.txt:51541:accepts, like a sombre and resigned goddess, the religion of love.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51547:“Not when I may be going away, and you cannot come!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51555:She replied, sobbing, by that word from paradise which is never more
tests/les_miserables.txt:51556:charming than amid tears:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51561:He continued in a tone which was an indescribable caress:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51563:“Do not weep. Tell me, will you do this for me, and cease to weep?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51570:“Cosette, I have never given my word of honor to any one, because my
tests/les_miserables.txt:51572:I give you my most sacred word of honor, that if you go away I shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:51576:In the tone with which he uttered these words there lay a melancholy so
tests/les_miserables.txt:51577:solemn and so tranquil, that Cosette trembled. She felt that chill
tests/les_miserables.txt:51578:which is produced by a true and gloomy thing as it passes by. The shock
tests/les_miserables.txt:51579:made her cease weeping.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51581:“Now, listen,” said he, “do not expect me to-morrow.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51587:“Do not expect me until the day after to-morrow.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51599:“Let us sacrifice one day in order to gain our whole lives, perhaps.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51604:“He is a man who never changes his habits, and he has never received
tests/les_miserables.txt:51605:any one except in the evening.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51631:happen, one never knows; I live with that friend named Courfeyrac, Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:51635:He searched in his pocket, pulled out his penknife, and with the blade
tests/les_miserables.txt:51640:In the meantime, Cosette had begun to gaze into his eyes once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51647:us. Wait; expect me the day after to-morrow.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51651:and come! How happy men are! I shall remain entirely alone! Oh! How sad
tests/les_miserables.txt:51660:be successful. I will question you no further, since you do not wish
tests/les_miserables.txt:51662:that music from _Euryanthe_ that you love, and that you came one
tests/les_miserables.txt:51664:will come early. I shall expect you at dusk, at nine o’clock precisely,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51673:those electric currents which place lovers in continual communication,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51674:both being intoxicated with delight even in their sorrow, they fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:51675:into each other’s arms, without perceiving that their lips met while
tests/les_miserables.txt:51683:idea had crossed his mind; an idea, alas! that he himself judged to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:51684:senseless and impossible. He had come to a desperate decision.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51693:At that epoch, Father Gillenormand was well past his ninety-first
tests/les_miserables.txt:51695:Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6, in the old house which he owned. He was, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:51697:perfectly erect, whom age bears down without bending, and whom even
tests/les_miserables.txt:51698:sorrow cannot curve.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51702:landing-place so vigorously with his cane when Basque was slow in
tests/les_miserables.txt:51704:space of barely six months. He had viewed, almost tranquilly, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:51705:coupling of words, in the _Moniteur:_ M. Humblot-Conté, peer of France.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51706:The fact is, that the old man was deeply dejected. He did not bend, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:51707:did not yield; this was no more a characteristic of his physical than
tests/les_miserables.txt:51710:planted, that is the exact word, in the conviction that that
tests/les_miserables.txt:51711:good-for-nothing young scamp would ring at his door some day or other;
tests/les_miserables.txt:51712:now he had reached the point, where, at certain gloomy hours, he said
tests/les_miserables.txt:51713:to himself, that if Marius made him wait much longer—It was not death
tests/les_miserables.txt:51716:entered his brain until that day; now the thought began to recur to
tests/les_miserables.txt:51717:him, and it chilled him. Absence, as is always the case in genuine and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51719:for the ungrateful child, who had gone off like a flash. It is during
tests/les_miserables.txt:51720:December nights, when the cold stands at ten degrees, that one thinks
tests/les_miserables.txt:51723:M. Gillenormand was, or thought himself, above all things, incapable of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51725:would die rather,” he said to himself. He did not consider himself as
tests/les_miserables.txt:51730:He began to lose his teeth, which added to his sadness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51732:M. Gillenormand, without however acknowledging it to himself, for it
tests/les_miserables.txt:51736:He had had placed in his chamber, opposite the head of his bed, so that
tests/les_miserables.txt:51737:it should be the first thing on which his eyes fell on waking, an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:51738:portrait of his other daughter, who was dead, Madame Pontmercy, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51739:portrait which had been taken when she was eighteen. He gazed
tests/les_miserables.txt:51740:incessantly at that portrait. One day, he happened to say, as he gazed
tests/les_miserables.txt:51746:“To my sister?” inquired Mademoiselle Gillenormand. “Yes, certainly.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51754:Once as he sat with his knees pressed together, and his eyes almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:51755:closed, in a despondent attitude, his daughter ventured to say to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51760:She paused, not daring to proceed further.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51767:He raised his aged head, laid his withered and emaciated fist on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:51768:table, and exclaimed in his most irritated and vibrating tone:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51770:“Poor Marius, do you say! That gentleman is a knave, a wretched
tests/les_miserables.txt:51771:scoundrel, a vain little ingrate, a heartless, soulless, haughty, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51772:wicked man!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51778:Three days later he broke a silence which had lasted four hours, to say
tests/les_miserables.txt:51785:Aunt Gillenormand renounced every effort, and pronounced this acute
tests/les_miserables.txt:51786:diagnosis: “My father never cared very much for my sister after her
tests/les_miserables.txt:51787:folly. It is clear that he detests Marius.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51790:“After her folly” meant: “after she had married the colonel.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51793:However, as the reader has been able to conjecture, Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:51795:officer of lancers, for Marius. The substitute, Théodule, had not been
tests/les_miserables.txt:51796:a success. M. Gillenormand had not accepted the _quid pro quo_. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:51797:vacancy in the heart does not accommodate itself to a stop-gap.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51798:Théodule, on his side, though he scented the inheritance, was disgusted
tests/les_miserables.txt:51799:at the task of pleasing. The goodman bored the lancer; and the lancer
tests/les_miserables.txt:51800:shocked the goodman. Lieutenant Théodule was gay, no doubt, but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51801:chatter-box, frivolous, but vulgar; a high liver, but a frequenter of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51802:bad company; he had mistresses, it is true, and he had a great deal to
tests/les_miserables.txt:51804:qualities had a defect. M. Gillenormand was worn out with hearing him
tests/les_miserables.txt:51805:tell about the love affairs that he had in the vicinity of the barracks
tests/les_miserables.txt:51807:came in his uniform, with the tricolored cockade. This rendered him
tests/les_miserables.txt:51809:daughter: “I’ve had enough of that Théodule. I haven’t much taste for
tests/les_miserables.txt:51810:warriors in time of peace. Receive him if you choose. I don’t know but
tests/les_miserables.txt:51811:I prefer slashers to fellows that drag their swords. The clash of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51812:blades in battle is less dismal, after all, than the clank of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:51813:scabbard on the pavement. And then, throwing out your chest like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51814:bully and lacing yourself like a girl, with stays under your cuirass,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51815:is doubly ridiculous. When one is a veritable man, one holds equally
tests/les_miserables.txt:51816:aloof from swagger and from affected airs. He is neither a blusterer
tests/les_miserables.txt:51817:nor a finnicky-hearted man. Keep your Théodule for yourself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51823:grand-uncle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51825:In fact, as he had good sense, and as he had compared the two, Théodule
tests/les_miserables.txt:51828:One evening,—it was the 24th of June, which did not prevent Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:51831:his chamber, amid its pastoral scenes, with his feet propped on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:51832:andirons, half enveloped in his huge screen of coromandel lacquer, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:51834:candles under a green shade, engulfed in his tapestry armchair, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:51835:his hand a book which he was not reading. He was dressed, according to
tests/les_miserables.txt:51836:his wont, like an _incroyable_, and resembled an antique portrait by
tests/les_miserables.txt:51838:his daughter covered him up, whenever he went out, in a vast bishop’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:51839:wadded cloak, which concealed his attire. At home, he never wore a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51840:dressing gown, except when he rose and retired. “It gives one a look of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51844:as usual, bitterness predominated. His tenderness once soured always
tests/les_miserables.txt:51845:ended by boiling and turning to indignation. He had reached the point
tests/les_miserables.txt:51846:where a man tries to make up his mind and to accept that which rends
tests/les_miserables.txt:51849:should have done it long ago, that he must renounce the idea. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:51850:trying to accustom himself to the thought that all was over, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:51852:whole nature revolted; his aged paternity would not consent to this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51854:His bald head had fallen upon his breast, and he fixed a melancholy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51860:“Can Monsieur receive M. Marius?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51863:The old man sat up erect, pallid, and like a corpse which rises under
tests/les_miserables.txt:51864:the influence of a galvanic shock. All his blood had retreated to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:51870:“I don’t know,” replied Basque, intimidated and put out of countenance
tests/les_miserables.txt:51871:by his master’s air; “I have not seen him. Nicolette came in and said
tests/les_miserables.txt:51875:Father Gillenormand stammered in a low voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51881:fixed on the door. It opened once more. A young man entered. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:51886:His almost squalid attire was not perceptible in the obscurity caused
tests/les_miserables.txt:51887:by the shade. Nothing could be seen but his calm, grave, but strangely
tests/les_miserables.txt:51888:sad face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51891:amazement and joy, could see anything except a brightness as when one
tests/les_miserables.txt:51892:is in the presence of an apparition. He was on the point of swooning;
tests/les_miserables.txt:51893:he saw Marius through a dazzling light. It certainly was he, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:51894:certainly was Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51897:speak, in a single glance. He found him noble, handsome, distinguished,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51898:well-grown, a complete man, with a suitable mien and a charming air. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:51899:felt a desire to open his arms, to call him, to fling himself forward;
tests/les_miserables.txt:51900:his heart melted with rapture, affectionate words swelled and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51901:overflowed his breast; at length all his tenderness came to the light
tests/les_miserables.txt:51902:and reached his lips, and, by a contrast which constituted the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:51903:foundation of his nature, what came forth was harshness. He said
tests/les_miserables.txt:51906:“What have you come here for?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51915:arms. He was displeased with Marius and with himself. He was conscious
tests/les_miserables.txt:51916:that he was brusque, and that Marius was cold. It caused the goodman
tests/les_miserables.txt:51921:“Then why did you come?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51924:That “then” signified: _If you do not come to embrace me_. Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:51925:looked at his grandfather, whose pallor gave him a face of marble.
tests/les_miserables.txt:51930:“Have you come to beg my pardon? Do you acknowledge your faults?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51934:child” would yield. Marius shivered; it was the denial of his father
tests/les_miserables.txt:51940:“Then,” exclaimed the old man impetuously, with a grief that was
tests/les_miserables.txt:51944:Marius clasped his hands, advanced a step, and said in a feeble and
tests/les_miserables.txt:51945:trembling voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51950:These words touched M. Gillenormand; uttered a little sooner, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:51951:would have rendered him tender, but they came too late. The grandfather
tests/les_miserables.txt:51952:rose; he supported himself with both hands on his cane; his lips were
tests/les_miserables.txt:51958:play, to balls, to the café, to the billiard-hall; you have wit, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:51960:brands in the heart of summer; you are rich with the only riches that
tests/les_miserables.txt:51961:are really such, I possess all the poverty of age; infirmity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:51963:eyes, strength, appetite, health, gayety, a forest of black hair; I
tests/les_miserables.txt:51966:confound incessantly, the Rue Charlot, the Rue du Chaume, and the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:51967:Saint-Claude, that is what I have come to; you have before you the
tests/les_miserables.txt:51969:far am I advancing into the night; you are in love, that is a matter of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51970:course, I am beloved by no one in all the world; and you ask pity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51972:courthouse, Messieurs the lawyers, I sincerely compliment you. You are
tests/les_miserables.txt:51976:And the octogenarian went on in a grave and angry voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:51981:“Sir,” said Marius, “I know that my presence is displeasing to you, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:51982:I have come merely to ask one thing of you, and then I shall go away
tests/les_miserables.txt:51990:This was the translation of the tender words which lay at the bottom of
tests/les_miserables.txt:51993:“Ask my pardon! Throw yourself on my neck!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:51997:his harsh reception had repelled the lad, that his hardness was driving
tests/les_miserables.txt:51999:as his grief was straightway converted into wrath, it increased his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52001:did not understand, which made the goodman furious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52007:easily guessed, to lead a bachelor life; it’s more convenient, to play
tests/les_miserables.txt:52008:the dandy, to come in at all hours, to amuse yourself; you have given
tests/les_miserables.txt:52009:me no signs of life, you have contracted debts without even telling me
tests/les_miserables.txt:52010:to pay them, you have become a smasher of windows and a blusterer, and,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52011:at the end of four years, you come to me, and that is all you have to
tests/les_miserables.txt:52015:This violent fashion of driving a grandson to tenderness was productive
tests/les_miserables.txt:52016:only of silence on the part of Marius. M. Gillenormand folded his arms;
tests/les_miserables.txt:52017:a gesture which with him was peculiarly imperious, and apostrophized
tests/les_miserables.txt:52020:“Let us make an end of this. You have come to ask something of me, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:52025:over a precipice, “I have come to ask your permission to marry.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52033:A second later, the door was opened once more, Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:52035:mute, with pendant arms and the face of a criminal; M. Gillenormand was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52036:pacing back and forth in the room. He turned to his daughter and said
tests/les_miserables.txt:52043:The curt, hoarse sound of the old man’s voice announced a strange
tests/les_miserables.txt:52044:degree of excitement. The aunt gazed at Marius with a frightened air,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52045:hardly appeared to recognize him, did not allow a gesture or a syllable
tests/les_miserables.txt:52046:to escape her, and disappeared at her father’s breath more swiftly than
tests/les_miserables.txt:52047:a straw before the hurricane.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52049:In the meantime, Father Gillenormand had returned and placed his back
tests/les_miserables.txt:52050:against the chimney-piece once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52054:revolution since I had the honor to see you last. The Jacobins got the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52055:upper hand. You must have been delighted. Are you not a Republican
tests/les_miserables.txt:52056:since you are a Baron? You can make that agree. The Republic makes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52057:good sauce for the barony. Are you one of those decorated by July? Have
tests/les_miserables.txt:52059:Saint-Antoine, opposite the Rue des Nonamdières, there is a cannon-ball
tests/les_miserables.txt:52060:incrusted in the wall of the third story of a house with this
tests/les_miserables.txt:52061:inscription: ‘July 28th, 1830.’ Go take a look at that. It produces a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52062:good effect. Ah! those friends of yours do pretty things. By the way,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52063:aren’t they erecting a fountain in the place of the monument of M. le
tests/les_miserables.txt:52064:Duc de Berry? So you want to marry? Whom? Can one inquire without
tests/les_miserables.txt:52065:indiscretion?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52070:“Come now, you have a profession? A fortune made? How much do you earn
tests/les_miserables.txt:52075:almost fierce.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52081:Marius did not reply. M. Gillenormand continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:52083:“Then I understand the girl is rich?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52086:“As rich as I am.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52095:“Expectations?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52110:“Mademoiselle Fauchelevent.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52113:“Fauchewhat?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52116:“Fauchelevent.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52119:“Pttt!” ejaculated the old gentleman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52121:“Sir!” exclaimed Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52127:hundred livres a year, Madame la Baronne de Pontmercy will go and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52128:purchase a couple of sous’ worth of parsley from the fruiterer.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52131:“Sir,” repeated Marius, in the despair at the last hope, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52132:vanishing, “I entreat you! I conjure you in the name of Heaven, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:52133:clasped hands, sir, I throw myself at your feet, permit me to marry
tests/les_miserables.txt:52138:coughing and laughing at the same time.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52141:blockhead, that absurd numskull! What a shame that I’m not twenty-five!
tests/les_miserables.txt:52142:How I’d treat him to a nice respectful summons! How nicely I’d get
tests/les_miserables.txt:52146:shoes, she has no chemise, that just suits; I want to throw my career,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52148:wretchedness with a woman around my neck, that’s an idea, and you must
tests/les_miserables.txt:52149:consent to it!” and the old fossil will consent.’ Go, my lad, do as you
tests/les_miserables.txt:52150:like, attach your paving-stone, marry your Pousselevent, your
tests/les_miserables.txt:52160:At the tone in which that “never” was uttered, Marius lost all hope. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:52161:traversed the chamber with slow steps, with bowed head, tottering and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52164:door opened, and Marius was on the point of going out, he advanced four
tests/les_miserables.txt:52165:paces, with the senile vivacity of impetuous and spoiled old gentlemen,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52166:seized Marius by the collar, brought him back energetically into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52167:room, flung him into an armchair and said to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:52172:“It was that single word “father” which had effected this revolution.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52174:Marius stared at him in bewilderment. M. Gillenormand’s mobile face was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52184:The old man’s entire countenance lighted up with indescribable
tests/les_miserables.txt:52185:radiance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52187:“Yes, that’s right, call me father, and you’ll see!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52192:from discouragement to hope, was stunned and intoxicated by it, as it
tests/les_miserables.txt:52193:were. He was seated near the table, the light from the candles brought
tests/les_miserables.txt:52194:out the dilapidation of his costume, which Father Gillenormand regarded
tests/les_miserables.txt:52200:penny then? You are dressed like a pickpocket.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52203:He rummaged in a drawer, drew forth a purse, which he laid on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52208:her. You cannot imagine it; the first time I saw her was at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52209:Luxembourg, she came there; in the beginning, I did not pay much heed
tests/les_miserables.txt:52210:to her, and then, I don’t know how it came about, I fell in love with
tests/les_miserables.txt:52212:at her own home, her father does not know it, just fancy, they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:52217:the water. I absolutely must marry her, since I should go mad
tests/les_miserables.txt:52219:omitted anything. She lives in a garden with an iron fence, in the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:52223:Father Gillenormand had seated himself, with a beaming countenance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52225:voice, he enjoyed at the same time a protracted pinch of snuff. At the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52230:barracks in that vicinity?—Why, yes, that’s it. Your cousin Théodule
tests/les_miserables.txt:52231:has spoken to me about it. The lancer, the officer. A gay girl, my good
tests/les_miserables.txt:52233:called the Rue Blomet.—It all comes back to me now. I have heard of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52235:Pamela. Your taste is not bad. She is said to be a very tidy creature.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52236:Between ourselves, I think that simpleton of a lancer has been courting
tests/les_miserables.txt:52241:Jacobin. I like you better in love with a petticoat, sapristi! with
tests/les_miserables.txt:52242:twenty petticoats, than with M. de Robespierre. For my part, I will do
tests/les_miserables.txt:52243:myself the justice to say, that in the line of _sans-culottes_, I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:52245:deuce! There’s no objection to that. As for the little one, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:52246:receives you without her father’s knowledge. That’s in the established
tests/les_miserables.txt:52249:ferociously; one does not precipitate himself into the tragic; one does
tests/les_miserables.txt:52250:not make one’s mind to marriage and M. le Maire with his scarf. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:52252:along, mortals; don’t marry. You come and look up your grandfather, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:52258:pistoles. Amuse yourself, deuce take it!’ Nothing better! That’s the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52263:Marius, petrified and incapable of uttering a syllable, made a sign
tests/les_miserables.txt:52267:the knee, stared him full in the face with a mysterious and beaming
tests/les_miserables.txt:52274:had just said. This twaddle about the Rue Blomet, Pamela, the barracks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52275:the lancer, had passed before Marius like a dissolving view. Nothing of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52276:all that could bear any reference to Cosette, who was a lily. The good
tests/les_miserables.txt:52278:which Marius did understand, and which were a mortal insult to Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52279:Those words, “make her your mistress,” entered the heart of the strict
tests/les_miserables.txt:52282:He rose, picked up his hat which lay on the floor, and walked to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52284:his grandfather, raised his head erect again, and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:52290:Father Gillenormand, utterly confounded, opened his mouth, extended his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52291:arms, tried to rise, and before he could utter a word, the door closed
tests/les_miserables.txt:52292:once more, and Marius had disappeared.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52295:struck by lightning, without the power to speak or breathe, as though a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52296:clenched fist grasped his throat. At last he tore himself from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52297:armchair, ran, so far as a man can run at ninety-one, to the door,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52298:opened it, and cried:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:52303:His daughter made her appearance, then the domestics. He began again,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52304:with a pitiful rattle: “Run after him! Bring him back! What have I done
tests/les_miserables.txt:52306:he will not come back!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52309:He went to the window which looked out on the street, threw it open
tests/les_miserables.txt:52311:Basque and Nicolette held him behind, and shouted:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:52316:But Marius could no longer hear him, for at that moment he was turning
tests/les_miserables.txt:52317:the corner of the Rue Saint-Louis.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52319:The octogenarian raised his hands to his temples two or three times
tests/les_miserables.txt:52320:with an expression of anguish, recoiled tottering, and fell back into
tests/les_miserables.txt:52321:an armchair, pulseless, voiceless, tearless, with quivering head and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52322:lips which moved with a stupid air, with nothing in his eyes and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52323:nothing any longer in his heart except a gloomy and profound something
tests/les_miserables.txt:52324:which resembled night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52337:That same day, towards four o’clock in the afternoon, Jean Valjean was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52338:sitting alone on the back side of one of the most solitary slopes in
tests/les_miserables.txt:52339:the Champ-de-Mars. Either from prudence, or from a desire to meditate,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52340:or simply in consequence of one of those insensible changes of habit
tests/les_miserables.txt:52341:which gradually introduce themselves into the existence of every one,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52342:he now rarely went out with Cosette. He had on his workman’s waistcoat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52343:and trousers of gray linen; and his long-visored cap concealed his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52344:countenance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52346:He was calm and happy now beside Cosette; that which had, for a time,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52348:two, anxieties of another nature had come up. One day, while walking on
tests/les_miserables.txt:52349:the boulevard, he had caught sight of Thénardier; thanks to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52350:disguise, Thénardier had not recognized him; but since that day, Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:52351:Valjean had seen him repeatedly, and he was now certain that Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:52354:This had been sufficient to make him come to a decision.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52356:Moreover, Paris was not tranquil: political troubles presented this
tests/les_miserables.txt:52357:inconvenient feature, for any one who had anything to conceal in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52358:life, that the police had grown very uneasy and very suspicious, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52360:very readily discover a man like Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52362:Jean Valjean had made up his mind to quit Paris, and even France, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52368:all sorts of thoughts in his mind,—Thénardier, the police, the journey,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52369:and the difficulty of procuring a passport.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52373:Last of all, an inexplicable circumstance which had just attracted his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52374:attention, and from which he had not yet recovered, had added to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52379:open, he had suddenly perceived on the wall, the following line,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52384:This was perfectly fresh, the grooves in the ancient black mortar were
tests/les_miserables.txt:52388:This had probably been written on the preceding night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52392:In any case, it was evident that the garden had been violated, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:52395:He recalled the odd incidents which had already alarmed the household.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52397:His mind was now filling in this canvas.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52399:He took good care not to speak to Cosette of the line written on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52402:In the midst of his preoccupations, he perceived, from a shadow cast by
tests/les_miserables.txt:52403:the sun, that some one had halted on the crest of the slope immediately
tests/les_miserables.txt:52410:characters, with a pencil:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:52416:he gazed all around him and perceived a creature larger than a child,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52417:not so large as a man, clad in a gray blouse and trousers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52418:dust-colored cotton velvet, who was jumping over the parapet and who
tests/les_miserables.txt:52421:Jean Valjean returned home at once, in a very thoughtful mood.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52433:understand this, the officer, the lancer, the ninny, Cousin Théodule,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52434:had left no trace in his mind. Not the slightest. The dramatic poet
tests/les_miserables.txt:52435:might, apparently, expect some complications from this revelation made
tests/les_miserables.txt:52438:believes nothing in the line of evil; later on comes the age when one
tests/les_miserables.txt:52439:believes everything. Suspicions are nothing else than wrinkles. Early
tests/les_miserables.txt:52440:youth has none of them. That which overwhelmed Othello glides innocuous
tests/les_miserables.txt:52441:over Candide. Suspect Cosette! There are hosts of crimes which Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:52442:could sooner have committed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52444:He began to wander about the streets, the resource of those who suffer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52445:He thought of nothing, so far as he could afterwards remember. At two
tests/les_miserables.txt:52446:o’clock in the morning he returned to Courfeyrac’s quarters and flung
tests/les_miserables.txt:52448:brightly when he sank into that frightful leaden slumber which permits
tests/les_miserables.txt:52449:ideas to go and come in the brain. When he awoke, he saw Courfeyrac,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52453:Courfeyrac said to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:52455:“Are you coming to General Lamarque’s funeral?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52458:It seemed to him that Courfeyrac was speaking Chinese.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52460:He went out some time after them. He put in his pocket the pistols
tests/les_miserables.txt:52461:which Javert had given him at the time of the adventure on the 3d of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52462:February, and which had remained in his hands. These pistols were still
tests/les_miserables.txt:52463:loaded. It would be difficult to say what vague thought he had in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52467:rained at times, he did not perceive it; for his dinner, he purchased a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52468:penny roll at a baker’s, put it in his pocket and forgot it. It appears
tests/les_miserables.txt:52470:moments when a man has a furnace within his skull. Marius was passing
tests/les_miserables.txt:52472:step he had taken since the preceding evening. He waited for night with
tests/les_miserables.txt:52473:feverish impatience, he had but one idea clearly before his mind;—this
tests/les_miserables.txt:52474:was, that at nine o’clock he should see Cosette. This last happiness
tests/les_miserables.txt:52475:now constituted his whole future; after that, gloom. At intervals, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:52481:At nightfall, at nine o’clock precisely, as he had promised Cosette, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:52482:was in the Rue Plumet. When he approached the grating he forgot
tests/les_miserables.txt:52483:everything. It was forty-eight hours since he had seen Cosette; he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52484:about to behold her once more; every other thought was effaced, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:52485:felt only a profound and unheard-of joy. Those minutes in which one
tests/les_miserables.txt:52486:lives centuries always have this sovereign and wonderful property, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:52487:at the moment when they are passing they fill the heart completely.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52489:Marius displaced the bar, and rushed headlong into the garden. Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:52491:the thicket, and approached the recess near the flight of steps: “She
tests/les_miserables.txt:52493:eyes, and saw that the shutters of the house were closed. He made the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52495:house, and, rendered senseless by love, intoxicated, terrified,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52497:at an evil hour, he tapped on the shutters. He knocked and knocked
tests/les_miserables.txt:52499:face make its appearance, and demand: “What do you want?” This was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52500:nothing in comparison with what he dimly caught a glimpse of. When he
tests/les_miserables.txt:52501:had rapped, he lifted up his voice and called Cosette.—“Cosette!” he
tests/les_miserables.txt:52502:cried; “Cosette!” he repeated imperiously. There was no reply. All was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52505:Marius fixed his despairing eyes on that dismal house, which was as
tests/les_miserables.txt:52506:black and as silent as a tomb and far more empty. He gazed at the stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:52507:seat on which he had passed so many adorable hours with Cosette. Then
tests/les_miserables.txt:52510:thought, and he said to himself that, since Cosette was gone, all that
tests/les_miserables.txt:52513:All at once he heard a voice which seemed to proceed from the street,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52514:and which was calling to him through the trees:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:52529:“Mr. Marius,” went on the voice, “your friends are waiting for you at
tests/les_miserables.txt:52530:the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:52533:This voice was not wholly unfamiliar to him. It resembled the hoarse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52534:rough voice of Éponine. Marius hastened to the gate, thrust aside the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52546:venerable, infantile austerity, had not accepted the gift of the stars;
tests/les_miserables.txt:52547:he had not admitted that a star could coin itself into louis d’or. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:52548:had not divined that what had fallen from heaven had come from
tests/les_miserables.txt:52549:Gavroche. He had taken the purse to the police commissioner of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52550:quarter, as a lost article placed by the finder at the disposal of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52551:claimants. The purse was actually lost. It is unnecessary to say that
tests/les_miserables.txt:52552:no one claimed it, and that it did not succor M. Mabeuf.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52554:Moreover, M. Mabeuf had continued his downward course.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52556:His experiments on indigo had been no more successful in the Jardin des
tests/les_miserables.txt:52560:expiration of thirteen months. Some coppersmith had made stewpans of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52561:them. His copper plates gone, and being unable to complete even the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52562:incomplete copies of his _Flora_ which were in his possession, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:52563:disposed of the text, at a miserable price, as waste paper, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52564:second-hand bookseller. Nothing now remained to him of his life’s work.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52565:He set to work to eat up the money for these copies. When he saw that
tests/les_miserables.txt:52566:this wretched resource was becoming exhausted, he gave up his garden
tests/les_miserables.txt:52568:given up his two eggs and the morsel of beef which he ate from time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:52570:furniture, then all duplicates of his bedding, his clothing and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52572:most precious books, many of which were of the greatest rarity, among
tests/les_miserables.txt:52574:Concordance des Bibles_, by Pierre de Besse; _Les Marguerites de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:52575:Marguerite_, of Jean de La Haye, with a dedication to the Queen of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52577:Sieur de Villiers Hotman; a _Florilegium Rabbinicum_ of 1644; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52578:_Tibullus_ of 1567, with this magnificent inscription: _Venetiis, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:52580:in 1644, which contained the famous variant of the manuscript 411,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52581:thirteenth century, of the Vatican, and those of the two manuscripts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52582:Venice, 393 and 394, consulted with such fruitful results by Henri
tests/les_miserables.txt:52583:Estienne, and all the passages in Doric dialect which are only found in
tests/les_miserables.txt:52584:the celebrated manuscript of the twelfth century belonging to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52585:Naples Library. M. Mabeuf never had any fire in his chamber, and went
tests/les_miserables.txt:52586:to bed at sundown, in order not to consume any candles. It seemed as
tests/les_miserables.txt:52588:out; he perceived the fact. The wretchedness of a child interests a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52589:mother, the wretchedness of a young man interests a young girl, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52590:wretchedness of an old man interests no one. It is, of all distresses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52591:the coldest. Still, Father Mabeuf had not entirely lost his childlike
tests/les_miserables.txt:52592:serenity. His eyes acquired some vivacity when they rested on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52593:books, and he smiled when he gazed at the Diogenes Laertius, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52594:a unique copy. His bookcase with glass doors was the only piece of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52595:furniture which he had kept beyond what was strictly indispensable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52602:What she called dinner was a loaf of bread and four or five potatoes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52604:“On credit?” suggested M. Mabeuf.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52609:M. Mabeuf opened his bookcase, took a long look at all his books, one
tests/les_miserables.txt:52610:after another, as a father obliged to decimate his children would gaze
tests/les_miserables.txt:52611:upon them before making a choice, then seized one hastily, put it in
tests/les_miserables.txt:52618:From that moment forth, Mother Plutarque saw a sombre veil, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52619:never more lifted, descend over the old man’s candid face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52624:M. Mabeuf went out with a book and returned with a coin. As the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52625:second-hand dealers perceived that he was forced to sell, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:52626:purchased of him for twenty sous that for which he had paid twenty
tests/les_miserables.txt:52627:francs, sometimes at those very shops. Volume by volume, the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:52629:though he cherished some secret hope that he should arrive at the end
tests/les_miserables.txt:52630:of his days before reaching the end of his books. His melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:52631:increased. Once, however, he had a pleasure. He had gone out with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52632:Robert Estienne, which he had sold for thirty-five sous under the Quai
tests/les_miserables.txt:52633:Malaquais, and he returned with an Aldus which he had bought for forty
tests/les_miserables.txt:52637:He belonged to the Horticultural Society. His destitution became known
tests/les_miserables.txt:52638:there. The president of the society came to see him, promised to speak
tests/les_miserables.txt:52639:to the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce about him, and did
tests/les_miserables.txt:52640:so.—“Why, what!” exclaimed the Minister, “I should think so! An old
tests/les_miserables.txt:52642:him!” On the following day, M. Mabeuf received an invitation to dine
tests/les_miserables.txt:52645:the Minister’s house. He perceived that his ragged cravat, his long,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52646:square coat, and his waxed shoes astonished the ushers. No one spoke to
tests/les_miserables.txt:52647:him, not even the Minister. About ten o’clock in the evening, while he
tests/les_miserables.txt:52649:woman in a low-necked gown whom he had not ventured to approach,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52652:carriage in which to go thither.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52654:He had acquired the habit of reading a few pages in his Diogenes
tests/les_miserables.txt:52656:enjoy the peculiarities of the text which he owned. He had now no other
tests/les_miserables.txt:52657:enjoyment. Several weeks passed. All at once, Mother Plutarque fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:52658:ill. There is one thing sadder than having no money with which to buy
tests/les_miserables.txt:52659:bread at the baker’s and that is having no money to purchase drugs at
tests/les_miserables.txt:52660:the apothecary’s. One evening, the doctor had ordered a very expensive
tests/les_miserables.txt:52662:Mabeuf opened his bookcase; there was nothing there. The last volume
tests/les_miserables.txt:52664:Laertius. He put this unique copy under his arm, and went out. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52665:the 4th of June, 1832; he went to the Porte Saint-Jacques, to Royal’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:52666:successor, and returned with one hundred francs. He laid the pile of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52667:five-franc pieces on the old serving-woman’s nightstand, and returned
tests/les_miserables.txt:52668:to his chamber without saying a word.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52671:post in his garden, and he could be seen over the top of the hedge,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52674:old man did not seem to perceive the fact.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52677:resembled shots and the clamors of a multitude.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52685:The gardener, spade on back, replied in the most unconcerned tone:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:52699:“Ah, good Heavens!” ejaculated the gardener.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52701:“In what direction?” went on M. Mabeuf.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52706:Father Mabeuf went to his room, took his hat, mechanically sought for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52707:book to place under his arm, found none, said: “Ah! truly!” and went
tests/les_miserables.txt:52721:Of what is revolt composed? Of nothing and of everything. Of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:52722:electricity disengaged, little by little, of a flame suddenly darting
tests/les_miserables.txt:52723:forth, of a wandering force, of a passing breath. This breath
tests/les_miserables.txt:52724:encounters heads which speak, brains which dream, souls which suffer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52725:passions which burn, wretchedness which howls, and bears them away.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52730:insolence of others.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52732:Irritated convictions, embittered enthusiasms, agitated indignations,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52733:instincts of war which have been repressed, youthful courage which has
tests/les_miserables.txt:52734:been exalted, generous blindness; curiosity, the taste for change, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52735:thirst for the unexpected, the sentiment which causes one to take
tests/les_miserables.txt:52737:prompter’s whistle, at the theatre; the vague hatreds, rancors,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52738:disappointments, every vanity which thinks that destiny has bankrupted
tests/les_miserables.txt:52739:it; discomfort, empty dreams, ambitions that are hedged about, whoever
tests/les_miserables.txt:52740:hopes for a downfall, some outcome, in short, at the very bottom, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52741:rabble, that mud which catches fire,—such are the elements of revolt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52742:That which is grandest and that which is basest; the beings who prowl
tests/les_miserables.txt:52743:outside of all bounds, awaiting an occasion, bohemians, vagrants,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52744:vagabonds of the crossroads, those who sleep at night in a desert of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52745:houses with no other roof than the cold clouds of heaven, those who,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52746:each day, demand their bread from chance and not from toil, the unknown
tests/les_miserables.txt:52748:revolt. Whoever cherishes in his soul a secret revolt against any deed
tests/les_miserables.txt:52750:riot, and, as soon as it makes its appearance, he begins to quiver, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52753:Revolt is a sort of waterspout in the social atmosphere which forms
tests/les_miserables.txt:52754:suddenly in certain conditions of temperature, and which, as it eddies
tests/les_miserables.txt:52755:about, mounts, descends, thunders, tears, razes, crushes, demolishes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52761:It communicates to those whom it seizes an indescribable and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52762:extraordinary power. It fills the firstcomer with the force of events;
tests/les_miserables.txt:52763:it converts everything into projectiles. It makes a cannon-ball of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52766:If we are to believe certain oracles of crafty political views, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52768:revolt strengthens those governments which it does not overthrow. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:52769:puts the army to the test; it consecrates the bourgeoisie, it draws out
tests/les_miserables.txt:52770:the muscles of the police; it demonstrates the force of the social
tests/les_miserables.txt:52771:framework. It is an exercise in gymnastics; it is almost hygiene. Power
tests/les_miserables.txt:52777:There is for everything a theory, which proclaims itself “good sense”;
tests/les_miserables.txt:52778:Philintus against Alcestis; mediation offered between the false and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52779:true; explanation, admonition, rather haughty extenuation which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52780:because it is mingled with blame and excuse, thinks itself wisdom, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52781:is often only pedantry. A whole political school called “the golden
tests/les_miserables.txt:52782:mean” has been the outcome of this. As between cold water and hot
tests/les_miserables.txt:52783:water, it is the lukewarm water party. This school with its false
tests/les_miserables.txt:52784:depth, all on the surface, which dissects effects without going back to
tests/les_miserables.txt:52785:first causes, chides from its height of a demi-science, the agitation
tests/les_miserables.txt:52786:of the public square.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52788:If we listen to this school, “The riots which complicated the affair of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52791:blue sky. They made the cloudy sky reappear. They caused that
tests/les_miserables.txt:52794:accomplished by fits and starts, there had been secret fractures; these
tests/les_miserables.txt:52795:riots rendered them perceptible. It might have been said: ‘Ah! this is
tests/les_miserables.txt:52797:deliverance; after the riots, one was conscious of a catastrophe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52799:“All revolt closes the shops, depresses the funds, throws the Exchange
tests/les_miserables.txt:52800:into consternation, suspends commerce, clogs business, precipitates
tests/les_miserables.txt:52801:failures; no more money, private fortunes rendered uneasy, public
tests/les_miserables.txt:52802:credit shaken, industry disconcerted, capital withdrawing, work at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52803:discount, fear everywhere; counter-shocks in every town. Hence gulfs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52804:It has been calculated that the first day of a riot costs France twenty
tests/les_miserables.txt:52805:millions, the second day forty, the third sixty, a three days’ uprising
tests/les_miserables.txt:52806:costs one hundred and twenty millions, that is to say, if only the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52807:financial result be taken into consideration, it is equivalent to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52808:disaster, a shipwreck or a lost battle, which should annihilate a fleet
tests/les_miserables.txt:52811:“No doubt, historically, uprisings have their beauty; the war of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52812:pavements is no less grandiose, and no less pathetic, than the war of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52813:thickets: in the one there is the soul of forests, in the other the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52814:heart of cities; the one has Jean Chouan, the other has a Jeanne.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52816:of the Parisian character, generosity, devotion, stormy gayety,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52817:students proving that bravery forms part of intelligence, the National
tests/les_miserables.txt:52818:Guard invincible, bivouacs of shopkeepers, fortresses of street
tests/les_miserables.txt:52819:urchins, contempt of death on the part of passers-by. Schools and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52820:legions clashed together. After all, between the combatants, there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:52821:only a difference of age; the race is the same; it is the same stoical
tests/les_miserables.txt:52823:families. The army, always a sad thing in civil wars, opposed prudence
tests/les_miserables.txt:52824:to audacity. Uprisings, while proving popular intrepidity, also
tests/les_miserables.txt:52825:educated the courage of the bourgeois.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52828:bloodshed add the future darkness, progress compromised, uneasiness
tests/les_miserables.txt:52832:enlarged, possibly, but France most assuredly diminished. Add, for all
tests/les_miserables.txt:52833:must needs be told, the massacres which have too often dishonored the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52834:victory of order grown ferocious over liberty gone mad. To sum up all,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52838:Thus speaks that approximation to wisdom with which the bourgeoisie,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52839:that approximation to the people, so willingly contents itself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52841:For our parts, we reject this word _uprisings_ as too large, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52842:consequently as too convenient. We make a distinction between one
tests/les_miserables.txt:52844:whether an uprising costs as much as a battle. Why a battle, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52845:first place? Here the question of war comes up. Is war less of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52846:scourge than an uprising is of a calamity? And then, are all uprisings
tests/les_miserables.txt:52847:calamities? And what if the revolt of July did cost a hundred and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52848:twenty millions? The establishment of Philip V. in Spain cost France
tests/les_miserables.txt:52849:two milliards. Even at the same price, we should prefer the 14th of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52850:July. However, we reject these figures, which appear to be reasons and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52851:which are only words. An uprising being given, we examine it by itself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52852:In all that is said by the doctrinarian objection above presented,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52853:there is no question of anything but effect, we seek the cause.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52855:We will be explicit.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52863:There is such a thing as an uprising, and there is such a thing as
tests/les_miserables.txt:52864:insurrection; these are two separate phases of wrath; one is in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52865:wrong, the other is in the right. In democratic states, the only ones
tests/les_miserables.txt:52866:which are founded on justice, it sometimes happens that the fraction
tests/les_miserables.txt:52867:usurps; then the whole rises and the necessary claim of its rights may
tests/les_miserables.txt:52868:proceed as far as resort to arms. In all questions which result from
tests/les_miserables.txt:52869:collective sovereignty, the war of the whole against the fraction is
tests/les_miserables.txt:52870:insurrection; the attack of the fraction against the whole is revolt;
tests/les_miserables.txt:52871:according as the Tuileries contain a king or the Convention, they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:52872:justly or unjustly attacked. The same cannon, pointed against the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52873:populace, is wrong on the 10th of August, and right on the 14th of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52874:Vendémiaire. Alike in appearance, fundamentally different in reality;
tests/les_miserables.txt:52875:the Swiss defend the false, Bonaparte defends the true. That which
tests/les_miserables.txt:52876:universal suffrage has effected in its liberty and in its sovereignty
tests/les_miserables.txt:52877:cannot be undone by the street. It is the same in things pertaining
tests/les_miserables.txt:52878:purely to civilization; the instinct of the masses, clear-sighted
tests/les_miserables.txt:52880:directed against Terray and absurd when directed against Turgot. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:52881:destruction of machines, the pillage of warehouses, the breaking of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52882:rails, the demolition of docks, the false routes of multitudes, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52883:refusal by the people of justice to progress, Ramus assassinated by
tests/les_miserables.txt:52885:revolt. Israel against Moses, Athens against Phocian, Rome against
tests/les_miserables.txt:52886:Cicero,—that is an uprising; Paris against the Bastille,—that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:52887:insurrection. The soldiers against Alexander, the sailors against
tests/les_miserables.txt:52889:Because Alexander is doing for Asia with the sword that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:52890:Christopher Columbus is doing for America with the compass; Alexander
tests/les_miserables.txt:52892:civilization are such augmentations of light, that all resistance in
tests/les_miserables.txt:52893:that case is culpable. Sometimes the populace counterfeits fidelity to
tests/les_miserables.txt:52896:contraband salt, a legitimate chronic revolt, which, at the decisive
tests/les_miserables.txt:52897:moment, on the day of salvation, at the very hour of popular victory,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52898:espouses the throne, turns into _chouannerie_, and, from having been an
tests/les_miserables.txt:52899:insurrection against, becomes an uprising for, sombre masterpieces of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52900:ignorance! The contraband salt dealer escapes the royal gibbets, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52901:with a rope’s end round his neck, mounts the white cockade. “Death to
tests/les_miserables.txt:52903:Saint-Barthélemy, the cut-throats of September, the manslaughterers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52905:assassins of Brune, Miquelets, Verdets, Cadenettes, the companions of
tests/les_miserables.txt:52906:Jéhu, the chevaliers of Brassard,—behold an uprising. La Vendée is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52907:grand, catholic uprising. The sound of right in movement is
tests/les_miserables.txt:52908:recognizable, it does not always proceed from the trembling of excited
tests/les_miserables.txt:52909:masses; there are mad rages, there are cracked bells, all tocsins do
tests/les_miserables.txt:52910:not give out the sound of bronze. The brawl of passions and ignorances
tests/les_miserables.txt:52911:is quite another thing from the shock of progress. Show me in what
tests/les_miserables.txt:52912:direction you are going. Rise, if you will, but let it be that you may
tests/les_miserables.txt:52913:grow great. There is no insurrection except in a forward direction. Any
tests/les_miserables.txt:52915:revolt; to retreat is to commit a deed of violence against the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:52916:race. Insurrection is a fit of rage on the part of truth; the pavements
tests/les_miserables.txt:52917:which the uprising disturbs give forth the spark of right. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:52919:XIV. is insurrection; Hébert against Danton is revolt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52921:Hence it results that if insurrection in given cases may be, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:52923:fatal of crimes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52925:There is also a difference in the intensity of heat; insurrection is
tests/les_miserables.txt:52926:often a volcano, revolt is often only a fire of straw.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52929:Polignac is a rioter; Camille Desmoulins is one of the governing
tests/les_miserables.txt:52932:Insurrection is sometimes resurrection.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52935:modern fact, and all history anterior to this fact being, for the space
tests/les_miserables.txt:52937:of peoples, each epoch of history brings with it that protest of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:52938:it is capable. Under the Cæsars, there was no insurrection, but there
tests/les_miserables.txt:52941:The _facit indignatio_ replaces the Gracchi.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52946:the ideal world, who makes of his vision an enormous satire and casts
tests/les_miserables.txt:52947:on Rome-Nineveh, on Rome-Babylon, on Rome-Sodom, the flaming reflection
tests/les_miserables.txt:52948:of the Apocalypse. John on his rock is the sphinx on its pedestal; we
tests/les_miserables.txt:52950:writes the _Annales_ is of the Latin race, let us rather say he is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52953:As the Neros reign in a black way, they should be painted to match. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:52955:into the channel a concentrated prose which bites.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52957:Despots count for something in the question of philosophers. A word
tests/les_miserables.txt:52958:that is chained is a terrible word. The writer doubles and trebles his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52959:style when silence is imposed on a nation by its master. From this
tests/les_miserables.txt:52960:silence there arises a certain mysterious plenitude which filters into
tests/les_miserables.txt:52961:thought and there congeals into bronze. The compression of history
tests/les_miserables.txt:52962:produces conciseness in the historian. The granite solidity of such and
tests/les_miserables.txt:52963:such a celebrated prose is nothing but the accumulation effected by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52966:Tyranny constrains the writer to conditions of diameter which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:52967:augmentations of force. The Ciceronian period, which hardly sufficed
tests/les_miserables.txt:52969:the phrase, the more intensity in the blow. Tacitus thinks with all his
tests/les_miserables.txt:52972:The honesty of a great heart, condensed in justice and truth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52975:Be it remarked, in passing, that Tacitus is not historically superposed
tests/les_miserables.txt:52976:upon Cæsar. The Tiberii were reserved for him. Cæsar and Tacitus are
tests/les_miserables.txt:52977:two successive phenomena, a meeting between whom seems to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:52978:mysteriously avoided, by the One who, when He sets the centuries on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52979:stage, regulates the entrances and the exits. Cæsar is great, Tacitus
tests/les_miserables.txt:52981:clash with one another. The guardian of justice, in striking Cæsar,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52983:wars of Africa and Spain, the pirates of Sicily destroyed, civilization
tests/les_miserables.txt:52984:introduced into Gaul, into Britanny, into Germany,—all this glory
tests/les_miserables.txt:52985:covers the Rubicon. There is here a sort of delicacy of the divine
tests/les_miserables.txt:52986:justice, hesitating to let loose upon the illustrious usurper the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52987:formidable historian, sparing Cæsar Tacitus, and according extenuating
tests/les_miserables.txt:52988:circumstances to genius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52991:genius. There is corruption under all illustrious tyrants, but the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52992:moral pest is still more hideous under infamous tyrants. In such
tests/les_miserables.txt:52993:reigns, nothing veils the shame; and those who make examples, Tacitus
tests/les_miserables.txt:52994:as well as Juvenal, slap this ignominy which cannot reply, in the face,
tests/les_miserables.txt:52995:more usefully in the presence of all humanity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:52998:under Domitian, there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:52999:repulsiveness of the tyrant. The villainy of slaves is a direct product
tests/les_miserables.txt:53000:of the despot; a miasma exhales from these cowering consciences wherein
tests/les_miserables.txt:53001:the master is reflected; public powers are unclean; hearts are small;
tests/les_miserables.txt:53002:consciences are dull, souls are like vermin; thus it is under
tests/les_miserables.txt:53003:Caracalla, thus it is under Commodus, thus it is under Heliogabalus,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53004:while, from the Roman Senate, under Cæsar, there comes nothing but the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53005:odor of the dung which is peculiar to the eyries of the eagles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53007:Hence the advent, apparently tardy, of the Tacituses and the Juvenals;
tests/les_miserables.txt:53008:it is in the hour for evidence, that the demonstrator makes his
tests/les_miserables.txt:53009:appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53011:But Juvenal and Tacitus, like Isaiah in Biblical times, like Dante in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53012:the Middle Ages, is man; riot and insurrection are the multitude, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:53015:In the majority of cases, riot proceeds from a material fact;
tests/les_miserables.txt:53016:insurrection is always a moral phenomenon. Riot is Masaniello;
tests/les_miserables.txt:53017:insurrection, Spartacus. Insurrection borders on mind, riot on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53018:stomach; Gaster grows irritated; but Gaster, assuredly, is not always
tests/les_miserables.txt:53020:holds a true, pathetic, and just point of departure. Nevertheless, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:53021:remains a riot. Why? It is because, right at bottom, it was wrong in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53022:form. Shy although in the right, violent although strong, it struck at
tests/les_miserables.txt:53023:random; it walked like a blind elephant; it left behind it the corpses
tests/les_miserables.txt:53024:of old men, of women, and of children; it wished the blood of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53025:inoffensive and innocent persons without knowing why. The nourishment
tests/les_miserables.txt:53026:of the people is a good object; to massacre them is a bad means.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53031:the insurrection is a riot, just as a river is a torrent. Ordinarily it
tests/les_miserables.txt:53032:ends in that ocean: revolution. Sometimes, however, coming from those
tests/les_miserables.txt:53033:lofty mountains which dominate the moral horizon, justice, wisdom,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53035:from rock to rock, after having reflected the sky in its transparency
tests/les_miserables.txt:53036:and increased by a hundred affluents in the majestic mien of triumph,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53037:insurrection is suddenly lost in some quagmire, as the Rhine is in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53042:inception, and, by giving the vote to insurrection, it deprives it of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53043:its arms. The disappearance of wars, of street wars as well as of wars
tests/les_miserables.txt:53044:on the frontiers, such is the inevitable progression. Whatever To-day
tests/les_miserables.txt:53045:may be, To-morrow will be peace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53047:However, insurrection, riot, and points of difference between the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53049:of such shades. In his mind, all is sedition, rebellion pure and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53051:whom must be punished by the chain and the kennel, barking, snapping,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53052:until such day as the head of the dog, suddenly enlarged, is outlined
tests/les_miserables.txt:53053:vaguely in the gloom face to face with the lion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53059:so far as history is concerned? Is it a revolt? Is it an insurrection?
tests/les_miserables.txt:53061:It may happen to us, in placing this formidable event on the stage, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:53062:say revolt now and then, but merely to distinguish superficial facts,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53063:and always preserving the distinction between revolt, the form, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53064:insurrection, the foundation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53066:This movement of 1832 had, in its rapid outbreak and in its melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:53067:extinction, so much grandeur, that even those who see in it only an
tests/les_miserables.txt:53068:uprising, never refer to it otherwise than with respect. For them, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:53069:is like a relic of 1830. Excited imaginations, say they, are not to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:53070:calmed in a day. A revolution cannot be cut off short. It must needs
tests/les_miserables.txt:53075:This pathetic crisis of contemporary history which the memory of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53076:Parisians calls “the epoch of the riots,” is certainly a characteristic
tests/les_miserables.txt:53077:hour amid the stormy hours of this century. A last word, before we
tests/les_miserables.txt:53078:enter on the recital.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53080:The facts which we are about to relate belong to that dramatic and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53081:living reality, which the historian sometimes neglects for lack of time
tests/les_miserables.txt:53082:and space. There, nevertheless, we insist upon it, is life,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53085:the distance of history. The epoch, surnamed “of the riots,” abounds in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53086:details of this nature. Judicial inquiries have not revealed, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53089:peculiarities, things which have not heretofore been known, about facts
tests/les_miserables.txt:53090:over which have passed the forgetfulness of some, and the death of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53091:others. The majority of the actors in these gigantic scenes have
tests/les_miserables.txt:53092:disappeared; beginning with the very next day they held their peace;
tests/les_miserables.txt:53095:against, but the deed which we shall paint will be genuine. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:53096:accordance with the conditions of the book which we are now writing, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:53097:shall show only one side and one episode, and certainly, the least
tests/les_miserables.txt:53099:we shall do it in such wise that the reader may catch a glimpse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53100:beneath the gloomy veil which we are about to lift, of the real form of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53101:this frightful public adventure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53109:In the spring of 1832, although the cholera had been chilling all minds
tests/les_miserables.txt:53110:for the last three months and had cast over their agitation an
tests/les_miserables.txt:53111:indescribable and gloomy pacification, Paris had already long been ripe
tests/les_miserables.txt:53112:for commotion. As we have said, the great city resembles a piece of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53113:artillery; when it is loaded, it suffices for a spark to fall, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53114:shot is discharged. In June, 1832, the spark was the death of General
tests/les_miserables.txt:53117:Lamarque was a man of renown and of action. He had had in succession,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53119:requisite for the two epochs, the bravery of the battle-field and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53121:sword was discernible in his speech. Like Foy, his predecessor, after
tests/les_miserables.txt:53122:upholding the command, he upheld liberty; he sat between the left and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53123:the extreme left, beloved of the people because he accepted the chances
tests/les_miserables.txt:53124:of the future, beloved of the populace because he had served the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53125:Emperor well; he was, in company with Comtes Gérard and Drouet, one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53127:personal offence. He hated Wellington with a downright hatred which
tests/les_miserables.txt:53128:pleased the multitude; and, for seventeen years, he majestically
tests/les_miserables.txt:53130:intervening events. In his death agony, at his last hour, he clasped to
tests/les_miserables.txt:53131:his breast a sword which had been presented to him by the officers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53133:uttering the word _country_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53135:His death, which was expected, was dreaded by the people as a loss, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53136:by the government as an occasion. This death was an affliction. Like
tests/les_miserables.txt:53137:everything that is bitter, affliction may turn to revolt. This is what
tests/les_miserables.txt:53138:took place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53140:On the preceding evening, and on the morning of the 5th of June, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53141:day appointed for Lamarque’s burial, the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:53142:the procession was to touch at, assumed a formidable aspect. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:53144:themselves as best they might. Joiners carried off door-weights of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53146:a dagger of a stocking-weaver’s hook by breaking off the hook and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53147:sharpening the stump. Another, who was in a fever “to attack,” slept
tests/les_miserables.txt:53148:wholly dressed for three days. A carpenter named Lombier met a comrade,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53150:“What then?” “I’m going to my timber-yard to get my compasses.” “What
tests/les_miserables.txt:53151:for?” “I don’t know,” said Lombier. A certain Jacqueline, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:53152:expeditious man, accosted some passing artisans: “Come here, you!” He
tests/les_miserables.txt:53156:cartridges and arms. Certain well-known leaders were going the rounds,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53157:that is to say, running from one house to another, to collect their
tests/les_miserables.txt:53159:Petit-Chapeau, the drinkers accosted each other with a grave air. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:53163:Bernier’s, groups whispered together. Among them was observed a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:53165:always discharged him “because they were obliged to dispute with him
tests/les_miserables.txt:53166:every day.” Mavot was killed on the following day at the barricade of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53168:struggle, seconded Mavot, and to the question: “What is your object?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53169:he replied: _“Insurrection.”_ Workmen assembled at the corner of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53170:Rue de Bercy, waited for a certain Lemarin, the revolutionary agent for
tests/les_miserables.txt:53171:the Faubourg Saint-Marceau. Watchwords were exchanged almost publicly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53173:On the 5th of June, accordingly, a day of mingled rain and sun, General
tests/les_miserables.txt:53174:Lamarque’s funeral procession traversed Paris with official military
tests/les_miserables.txt:53175:pomp, somewhat augmented through precaution. Two battalions, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:53177:their swords at their sides, escorted the coffin. The hearse was drawn
tests/les_miserables.txt:53178:by young men. The officers of the Invalides came immediately behind it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53179:bearing laurel branches. Then came an innumerable, strange, agitated
tests/les_miserables.txt:53180:multitude, the sectionaries of the Friends of the People, the Law
tests/les_miserables.txt:53181:School, the Medical School, refugees of all nationalities, and Spanish,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53182:Italian, German, and Polish flags, tricolored horizontal banners, every
tests/les_miserables.txt:53183:possible sort of banner, children waving green boughs, stone-cutters
tests/les_miserables.txt:53184:and carpenters who were on strike at the moment, printers who were
tests/les_miserables.txt:53185:recognizable by their paper caps, marching two by two, three by three,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53186:uttering cries, nearly all of them brandishing sticks, some brandishing
tests/les_miserables.txt:53188:rout, again a column. Squads chose themselves leaders; a man armed with
tests/les_miserables.txt:53191:in the branches of the trees, on balconies, in windows, on the roofs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53192:swarmed the heads of men, women, and children; all eyes were filled
tests/les_miserables.txt:53197:its hand on its sword. Four squadrons of carabineers could be seen in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53198:the Place Louis XV. in their saddles, with their trumpets at their
tests/les_miserables.txt:53199:head, cartridge-boxes filled and muskets loaded, all in readiness to
tests/les_miserables.txt:53200:march; in the Latin country and at the Jardin des Plantes, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53201:Municipal Guard echelonned from street to street; at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53204:at the Célestins; and the courtyard of the Louvre full of artillery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53205:The remainder of the troops were confined to their barracks, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:53206:reckoning the regiments of the environs of Paris. Power being uneasy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53207:held suspended over the menacing multitude twenty-four thousand
tests/les_miserables.txt:53208:soldiers in the city and thirty thousand in the banlieue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53210:Divers reports were in circulation in the cortège. Legitimist tricks
tests/les_miserables.txt:53211:were hinted at; they spoke of the Duc de Reichstadt, whom God had
tests/les_miserables.txt:53212:marked out for death at that very moment when the populace were
tests/les_miserables.txt:53214:unknown, announced that at a given hour two overseers who had been won
tests/les_miserables.txt:53215:over, would throw open the doors of a factory of arms to the people.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53216:That which predominated on the uncovered brows of the majority of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:53217:present was enthusiasm mingled with dejection. Here and there, also, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53218:that multitude given over to such violent but noble emotions, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:53219:were visible genuine visages of criminals and ignoble mouths which
tests/les_miserables.txt:53220:said: “Let us plunder!” There are certain agitations which stir up the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53221:bottoms of marshes and make clouds of mud rise through the water. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:53222:phenomenon to which “well drilled” policemen are no strangers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53224:The procession proceeded, with feverish slowness, from the house of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53225:deceased, by way of the boulevards as far as the Bastille. It rained
tests/les_miserables.txt:53227:incidents, the coffin borne round the Vendome column, stones thrown at
tests/les_miserables.txt:53228:the Duc de Fitz-James, who was seen on a balcony with his hat on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:53229:head, the Gallic cock torn from a popular flag and dragged in the mire,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53230:a policeman wounded with a blow from a sword at the Porte Saint-Martin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53231:an officer of the 12th Light Infantry saying aloud: “I am a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53232:Republican,” the Polytechnic School coming up unexpectedly against
tests/les_miserables.txt:53233:orders to remain at home, the shouts of: “Long live the Polytechnique!
tests/les_miserables.txt:53234:Long live the Republic!” marked the passage of the funeral train. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:53235:the Bastille, long files of curious and formidable people who descended
tests/les_miserables.txt:53236:from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, effected a junction with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53237:procession, and a certain terrible seething began to agitate the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53243:affair, entrusted with this same function.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53245:The hearse passed the Bastille, traversed the small bridge, and reached
tests/les_miserables.txt:53246:the esplanade of the bridge of Austerlitz. There it halted. The crowd,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53248:the aspect of a comet whose head was on the esplanade and whose tail
tests/les_miserables.txt:53249:spread out over the Quai Bourdon, covered the Bastille, and was
tests/les_miserables.txt:53250:prolonged on the boulevard as far as the Porte Saint-Martin. A circle
tests/les_miserables.txt:53251:was traced around the hearse. The vast rout held their peace. Lafayette
tests/les_miserables.txt:53252:spoke and bade Lamarque farewell. This was a touching and august
tests/les_miserables.txt:53253:instant, all heads uncovered, all hearts beat high.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53255:All at once, a man on horseback, clad in black, made his appearance in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53257:surmounted with a red liberty-cap. Lafayette turned aside his head.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53258:Exelmans quitted the procession.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53261:the Boulevard Bourdon to the bridge of Austerlitz one of those clamors
tests/les_miserables.txt:53262:which resemble billows stirred the multitude. Two prodigious shouts
tests/les_miserables.txt:53264:young men, amid the declamations of the throng, harnessed themselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:53265:and began to drag Lamarque in the hearse across the bridge of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53266:Austerlitz and Lafayette in a hackney-coach along the Quai Morland.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53268:In the crowd which surrounded and cheered Lafayette, it was noticed
tests/les_miserables.txt:53270:centenarian afterwards, who had also been in the war of 1776, and who
tests/les_miserables.txt:53274:In the meantime, the municipal cavalry on the left bank had been set in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53275:motion, and came to bar the bridge, on the right bank the dragoons
tests/les_miserables.txt:53277:who were dragging Lafayette suddenly caught sight of them at the corner
tests/les_miserables.txt:53278:of the quay and shouted: “The dragoons!” The dragoons advanced at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53279:walk, in silence, with their pistols in their holsters, their swords in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53280:their scabbards, their guns slung in their leather sockets, with an air
tests/les_miserables.txt:53281:of gloomy expectation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53283:They halted two hundred paces from the little bridge. The carriage in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53284:which sat Lafayette advanced to them, their ranks opened and allowed it
tests/les_miserables.txt:53285:to pass, and then closed behind it. At that moment the dragoons and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53286:crowd touched. The women fled in terror. What took place during that
tests/les_miserables.txt:53287:fatal minute? No one can say. It is the dark moment when two clouds
tests/les_miserables.txt:53288:come together. Some declare that a blast of trumpets sounding the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53289:charge was heard in the direction of the Arsenal, others that a blow
tests/les_miserables.txt:53290:from a dagger was given by a child to a dragoon. The fact is, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:53291:three shots were suddenly discharged: the first killed Cholet, chief of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53292:the squadron, the second killed an old deaf woman who was in the act of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53293:closing her window, the third singed the shoulder of an officer; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53294:woman screamed: “They are beginning too soon!” and all at once, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53295:squadron of dragoons which had remained in the barracks up to this
tests/les_miserables.txt:53296:time, was seen to debouch at a gallop with bared swords, through the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53300:breaks forth, many precipitate themselves to the bottom of the bank,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53302:the Isle Louviers, that vast citadel ready to hand, bristle with
tests/les_miserables.txt:53303:combatants, stakes are torn up, pistol-shots fired, a barricade begun,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53304:the young men who are thrust back pass the Austerlitz bridge with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53305:hearse at a run, and the municipal guard, the carabineers rush up, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53306:dragoons ply their swords, the crowd disperses in all directions, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53318:Everything bursts forth everywhere at once. Was it foreseen? Yes. Was
tests/les_miserables.txt:53319:it prepared? No. Whence comes it? From the pavements. Whence falls it?
tests/les_miserables.txt:53320:From the clouds. Here insurrection assumes the character of a plot;
tests/les_miserables.txt:53321:there of an improvisation. The first comer seizes a current of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53323:which is mingled a sort of formidable gayety. First come clamors, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53324:shops are closed, the displays of the merchants disappear; then come
tests/les_miserables.txt:53325:isolated shots; people flee; blows from gun-stocks beat against
tests/les_miserables.txt:53326:portes-cochères, servants can be heard laughing in the courtyards of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53330:A quarter of an hour had not elapsed when this is what was taking place
tests/les_miserables.txt:53331:at twenty different spots in Paris at once.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53335:carrying a horizontal tricolored flag covered with crape, and having at
tests/les_miserables.txt:53340:prominent belly, a sonorous voice, a bald head, a lofty brow, a black
tests/les_miserables.txt:53341:beard, and one of these stiff moustaches which will not lie flat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53342:offered cartridges publicly to passers-by.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53344:In the Rue Saint-Pierre-Montmartre, men with bare arms carried about a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53345:black flag, on which could be read in white letters this inscription:
tests/les_miserables.txt:53346:“Republic or Death!” In the Rue des Jeûneurs, Rue du Cadran, Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:53347:Montorgueil, Rue Mandar, groups appeared waving flags on which could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:53348:distinguished in gold letters, the word _section_ with a number. One of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53349:these flags was red and blue with an almost imperceptible stripe of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53352:They pillaged a factory of small-arms on the Boulevard Saint-Martin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53353:and three armorers’ shops, the first in the Rue Beaubourg, the second
tests/les_miserables.txt:53354:in the Rue Michel-le-Comte, the other in the Rue du Temple. In a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:53355:minutes, the thousand hands of the crowd had seized and carried off two
tests/les_miserables.txt:53362:of them had a flint-lock. They rang, entered, and set about making
tests/les_miserables.txt:53363:cartridges. One of these women relates: “I did not know what cartridges
tests/les_miserables.txt:53367:One cluster broke into a curiosity shop in the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:53374:boulevards, in the Latin country, in the quarter of the Halles, panting
tests/les_miserables.txt:53375:men, artisans, students, members of sections read proclamations and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53376:shouted: “To arms!” broke street lanterns, unharnessed carriages,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53378:rummaged cellars, rolled out hogsheads, heaped up paving-stones, rough
tests/les_miserables.txt:53379:slabs, furniture and planks, and made barricades.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53381:They forced the bourgeois to assist them in this. They entered the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53382:dwellings of women, they forced them to hand over the swords and guns
tests/les_miserables.txt:53384:“The arms have been delivered”; some signed “their names” to receipts
tests/les_miserables.txt:53386:Mayor’s office.” They disarmed isolated sentinels and National
tests/les_miserables.txt:53388:epaulets from officers. In the Rue du Cimitière-Saint-Nicholas, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:53389:officer of the National Guard, on being pursued by a crowd armed with
tests/les_miserables.txt:53390:clubs and foils, took refuge with difficulty in a house, whence he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:53393:In the Quartier Saint-Jacques, the students swarmed out of their hotels
tests/les_miserables.txt:53394:and ascended the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe to the Café du Progrèss, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:53395:descended to the Café des Sept-Billards, in the Rue des Mathurins.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53397:corner-posts, distributed arms. They plundered the timber-yard in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53398:Rue Transnonain in order to obtain material for barricades. On a single
tests/les_miserables.txt:53399:point the inhabitants resisted, at the corner of the Rue Sainte-Avoye
tests/les_miserables.txt:53400:and the Rue Simon-Le-Franc, where they destroyed the barricade with
tests/les_miserables.txt:53402:abandoned a barricade begun in the Rue de Temple after having fired on
tests/les_miserables.txt:53403:a detachment of the National Guard, and fled through the Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:53404:Corderie. The detachment picked up in the barricade a red flag, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53405:package of cartridges, and three hundred pistol-balls. The National
tests/les_miserables.txt:53406:Guardsmen tore up the flag, and carried off its tattered remains on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53409:All that we are here relating slowly and successively took place
tests/les_miserables.txt:53410:simultaneously at all points of the city in the midst of a vast tumult,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53411:like a mass of tongues of lightning in one clap of thunder. In less
tests/les_miserables.txt:53412:than an hour, twenty-seven barricades sprang out of the earth in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53413:quarter of the Halles alone. In the centre was that famous house No.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53414:50, which was the fortress of Jeanne and her six hundred companions,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53415:and which, flanked on the one hand by a barricade at Saint-Merry, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53416:on the other by a barricade of the Rue Maubuée, commanded three
tests/les_miserables.txt:53417:streets, the Rue des Arcis, the Rue Saint-Martin, and the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:53418:Aubry-le-Boucher, which it faced. The barricades at right angles fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:53419:back, the one of the Rue Montorgueil on the Grande-Truanderie, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53421:reckoning innumerable barricades in twenty other quarters of Paris, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53423:where was visible a porte-cochère torn from its hinges; another near
tests/les_miserables.txt:53424:the little bridge of the Hôtel-Dieu made with an “écossais,” which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:53425:been unharnessed and overthrown, three hundred paces from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53426:Prefecture of Police.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53428:At the barricade of the Rue des Ménétriers, a well-dressed man
tests/les_miserables.txt:53429:distributed money to the workmen. At the barricade of the Rue Grenetat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53430:a horseman made his appearance and handed to the one who seemed to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:53431:the commander of the barricade what had the appearance of a roll of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53432:silver. “Here,” said he, “this is to pay expenses, wine, et cætera.” A
tests/les_miserables.txt:53433:light-haired young man, without a cravat, went from barricade to
tests/les_miserables.txt:53434:barricade, carrying pass-words. Another, with a naked sword, a blue
tests/les_miserables.txt:53435:police cap on his head, placed sentinels. In the interior, beyond the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53436:barricades, the wine-shops and porters’ lodges were converted into
tests/les_miserables.txt:53437:guard-houses. Otherwise the riot was conducted after the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:53438:scientific military tactics. The narrow, uneven, sinuous streets, full
tests/les_miserables.txt:53439:of angles and turns, were admirably chosen; the neighborhood of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53440:Halles, in particular, a network of streets more intricate than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53441:forest. The Society of the Friends of the People had, it was said,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53442:undertaken to direct the insurrection in the Quartier Sainte-Avoye. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:53443:man killed in the Rue du Ponceau who was searched had on his person a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53446:That which had really undertaken the direction of the uprising was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53447:sort of strange impetuosity which was in the air. The insurrection had
tests/les_miserables.txt:53448:abruptly built barricades with one hand, and with the other seized
tests/les_miserables.txt:53450:train of powder catching fire, the insurgents had invaded and occupied,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53451:on the right bank, the Arsenal, the Mayoralty of the Place Royale, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53452:whole of the Marais, the Popincourt arms manufactory, la Galiote, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53454:the barracks of the Veterans, Sainte-Pélagie, the Place Maubert, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53456:o’clock in the evening, they were masters of the Bastille, of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53457:Lingerie, of the Blancs-Manteaux; their scouts had reached the Place
tests/les_miserables.txt:53458:des Victoires, and menaced the Bank, the Petits-Pères barracks, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53459:Post-Office. A third of Paris was in the hands of the rioters.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53461:The conflict had been begun on a gigantic scale at all points; and, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:53462:a result of the disarming domiciliary visits, and armorers’ shops
tests/les_miserables.txt:53463:hastily invaded, was, that the combat which had begun with the throwing
tests/les_miserables.txt:53464:of stones was continued with gun-shots.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53466:About six o’clock in the evening, the Passage du Saumon became the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53470:volcano, found himself in the passage between the two fires. All that
tests/les_miserables.txt:53471:he had to protect him from the bullets was the swell of the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:53472:half-columns which separate the shops; he remained in this delicate
tests/les_miserables.txt:53475:Meanwhile the call to arms was beaten, the National Guard armed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53477:their barracks. Opposite the passage de l’Ancre a drummer received a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53481:Michel-le-Comte, three officers fell dead one after the other. Many of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53482:the Municipal Guards, on being wounded, in the Rue des Lombards,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53485:In front of the Cour-Batave, a detachment of National Guards found a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53486:red flag bearing the following inscription: _Republican revolution, No.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53487:127_. Was this a revolution, in fact?
tests/les_miserables.txt:53489:The insurrection had made of the centre of Paris a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53490:inextricable, tortuous, colossal citadel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53493:was nothing but skirmishes. The proof that all would be decided there
tests/les_miserables.txt:53494:lay in the fact that there was no fighting going on there as yet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53496:In some regiments, the soldiers were uncertain, which added to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53497:fearful uncertainty of the crisis. They recalled the popular ovation
tests/les_miserables.txt:53498:which had greeted the neutrality of the 53d of the Line in July, 1830.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53500:Bugeaud, were in command, Bugeaud under Lobau. Enormous patrols,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53501:composed of battalions of the Line, enclosed in entire companies of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53502:National Guard, and preceded by a commissary of police wearing his
tests/les_miserables.txt:53503:scarf of office, went to reconnoitre the streets in rebellion. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:53504:insurgents, on their side, placed videttes at the corners of all open
tests/les_miserables.txt:53505:spaces, and audaciously sent their patrols outside the barricades. Each
tests/les_miserables.txt:53506:side was watching the other. The Government, with an army in its hand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53507:hesitated; the night was almost upon them, and the Saint-Merry tocsin
tests/les_miserables.txt:53511:These old sailors, accustomed to correct manœuvres and having as
tests/les_miserables.txt:53512:resource and guide only tactics, that compass of battles, are utterly
tests/les_miserables.txt:53513:disconcerted in the presence of that immense foam which is called
tests/les_miserables.txt:53514:public wrath.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53517:battalion of the 12th Light came at a run from Saint-Denis, the 14th of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53518:the Line arrived from Courbevoie, the batteries of the Military School
tests/les_miserables.txt:53519:had taken up their position on the Carrousel; cannons were descending
tests/les_miserables.txt:53520:from Vincennes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53522:Solitude was formed around the Tuileries. Louis Philippe was perfectly
tests/les_miserables.txt:53532:than one insurrection. Nothing is, generally, more singularly calm than
tests/les_miserables.txt:53534:rebellious quarters. Paris very speedily accustoms herself to
tests/les_miserables.txt:53536:that she does not put herself out for so small a matter. These colossal
tests/les_miserables.txt:53537:cities alone can offer such spectacles. These immense enclosures alone
tests/les_miserables.txt:53538:can contain at the same time civil war and an odd and indescribable
tests/les_miserables.txt:53539:tranquillity. Ordinarily, when an insurrection commences, when the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53540:shop-keeper hears the drum, the call to arms, the general alarm, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:53541:contents himself with the remark:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:53551:Often he adds carelessly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:53553:“Or somewhere in that direction.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53557:firing by platoons becomes audible, the shopkeeper says:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:53562:A moment later, the riot approaches and gains in force, he shuts up his
tests/les_miserables.txt:53563:shop precipitately, hastily dons his uniform, that is to say, he places
tests/les_miserables.txt:53564:his merchandise in safety and risks his own person.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53567:re-take the barricade; blood flows, the grape-shot riddles the fronts
tests/les_miserables.txt:53568:of the houses, the balls kill people in their beds, corpses encumber
tests/les_miserables.txt:53569:the streets. A few streets away, the shock of billiard-balls can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:53570:heard in the cafés.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53572:The theatres open their doors and present vaudevilles; the curious
tests/les_miserables.txt:53573:laugh and chat a couple of paces distant from these streets filled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:53574:war. Hackney-carriages go their way; passers-by are going to a dinner
tests/les_miserables.txt:53580:At the time of the insurrection of 1839, in the Rue Saint-Martin a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53581:little, infirm old man, pushing a hand-cart surmounted by a tricolored
tests/les_miserables.txt:53582:rag, in which he had carafes filled with some sort of liquid, went and
tests/les_miserables.txt:53583:came from barricade to troops and from troops to the barricade,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53584:offering his glasses of cocoa impartially,—now to the Government, now
tests/les_miserables.txt:53585:to anarchy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53587:Nothing can be stranger; and this is the peculiar character of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53588:uprisings in Paris, which cannot be found in any other capital. To this
tests/les_miserables.txt:53590:city of Voltaire and Napoleon is necessary.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53592:On this occasion, however, in the resort to arms of June 5th, 1832, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53593:great city felt something which was, perhaps, stronger than itself. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:53597:most distant and most “disinterested” quarters. The courageous took to
tests/les_miserables.txt:53599:Many streets were empty at four o’clock in the morning.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53603:the Cloister of Saint-Merry alone, entrenched and embattled in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53604:church; that the line was not to be depended on; that Armand Carrel had
tests/les_miserables.txt:53608:for a chair”; that one must be on one’s guard; that at night there
tests/les_miserables.txt:53609:would be people pillaging isolated dwellings in the deserted corners of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53610:Paris (there the imagination of the police, that Anne Radcliffe mixed
tests/les_miserables.txt:53611:up with the Government was recognizable); that a battery had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:53612:established in the Rue Aubry le Boucher; that Lobau and Bugeaud were
tests/les_miserables.txt:53614:latest, four columns would march simultaneously on the centre of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53615:uprising, the first coming from the Bastille, the second from the Porte
tests/les_miserables.txt:53617:that perhaps, also, the troops would evacuate Paris and withdraw to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53619:it certainly was serious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53622:he attack at once? It is certain that he was profoundly absorbed. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:53623:old lion seemed to scent an unknown monster in that gloom.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53625:Evening came, the theatres did not open; the patrols circulated with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:53626:air of irritation; passers-by were searched; suspicious persons were
tests/les_miserables.txt:53627:arrested. By nine o’clock, more than eight hundred persons had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:53628:arrested, the Prefecture of Police was encumbered with them, so was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53629:Conciergerie, so was La Force.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53631:At the Conciergerie in particular, the long vault which is called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53632:Rue de Paris was littered with trusses of straw upon which lay a heap
tests/les_miserables.txt:53634:that straw rustled by all these men, produced the sound of a heavy
tests/les_miserables.txt:53636:on top of each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53638:Anxiety reigned everywhere, and a certain tremor which was not habitual
tests/les_miserables.txt:53641:People barricaded themselves in their houses; wives and mothers were
tests/les_miserables.txt:53642:uneasy; nothing was to be heard but this: “Ah! my God! He has not come
tests/les_miserables.txt:53643:home!” There was hardly even the distant rumble of a vehicle to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:53647:tumult, the dull and indistinct sounds, to the things that were said:
tests/les_miserables.txt:53648:“It is cavalry,” or: “Those are the caissons galloping,” to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53652:They waited for the first cannon-shot. Men sprang up at the corners of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53655:moment, in proportion as the darkness descended, Paris seemed to take
tests/les_miserables.txt:53670:At the instant when the insurrection, arising from the shock of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53671:populace and the military in front of the Arsenal, started a movement
tests/les_miserables.txt:53672:in advance and towards the rear in the multitude which was following
tests/les_miserables.txt:53673:the hearse and which, through the whole length of the boulevards,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53674:weighed, so to speak, on the head of the procession, there arose a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53676:fled, made their escape, some with shouts of attack, others with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53677:pallor of flight. The great river which covered the boulevards divided
tests/les_miserables.txt:53679:over two hundred streets at once with the roar of a sewer that has
tests/les_miserables.txt:53682:At that moment, a ragged child who was coming down through the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:53683:Ménilmontant, holding in his hand a branch of blossoming laburnum which
tests/les_miserables.txt:53684:he had just plucked on the heights of Belleville, caught sight of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:53685:old holster-pistol in the show-window of a bric-à-brac merchant’s shop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53687:“Mother What’s-your-name, I’m going to borrow your machine.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53693:through the Rue Amelot and the Rue Basse, encountered the lad
tests/les_miserables.txt:53698:D’un écrit apocryphe
tests/les_miserables.txt:53701:Tutu, chapeau pointu!44
tests/les_miserables.txt:53704:It was little Gavroche on his way to the wars.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53706:On the boulevard he noticed that the pistol had no trigger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53708:Who was the author of that couplet which served to punctuate his march,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53709:and of all the other songs which he was fond of singing on occasion? We
tests/les_miserables.txt:53710:know not. Who does know? Himself, perhaps. However, Gavroche was well
tests/les_miserables.txt:53711:up in all the popular tunes in circulation, and he mingled with them
tests/les_miserables.txt:53712:his own chirpings. An observing urchin and a rogue, he made a potpourri
tests/les_miserables.txt:53713:of the voices of nature and the voices of Paris. He combined the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53715:acquainted with thieves, a tribe contiguous to his own. He had, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:53716:appears, been for three months apprenticed to a printer. He had one day
tests/les_miserables.txt:53717:executed a commission for M. Baour-Lormian, one of the Forty. Gavroche
tests/les_miserables.txt:53720:Moreover, Gavroche had no suspicion of the fact that when he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:53723:the part of Providence. His brothers in the evening, his father in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53726:artistically extracted from it the two brats, had shared with them some
tests/les_miserables.txt:53727:sort of breakfast which he had invented, and had then gone away,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53728:confiding them to that good mother, the street, who had brought him up,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53730:same spot in the evening, and had left them this discourse by way of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53731:farewell: “I break a cane, otherwise expressed, I cut my stick, or, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:53732:they say at the court, I file off. If you don’t find papa and mamma,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53733:young ’uns, come back here this evening. I’ll scramble you up some
tests/les_miserables.txt:53734:supper, and I’ll give you a shakedown.” The two children, picked up by
tests/les_miserables.txt:53735:some policeman and placed in the refuge, or stolen by some mountebank,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53737:did not return. The lowest depths of the actual social world are full
tests/les_miserables.txt:53738:of these lost traces. Gavroche did not see them again. Ten or twelve
tests/les_miserables.txt:53739:weeks had elapsed since that night. More than once he had scratched the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53740:back of his head and said: “Where the devil are my two children?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53744:Pont-aux-Choux. He noticed that there was but one shop open in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:53745:street, and, a matter worthy of reflection, that was a pastry-cook’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:53746:shop. This presented a providential occasion to eat another
tests/les_miserables.txt:53747:apple-turnover before entering the unknown. Gavroche halted, fumbled in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53748:his fob, turned his pocket inside out, found nothing, not even a sou,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53752:It is hard to miss the last cake.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53754:Nevertheless, Gavroche pursued his way.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53757:Rue du Parc-Royal, he felt called upon to make good the loss of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53758:apple-turnover which had been impossible, and he indulged himself in
tests/les_miserables.txt:53762:A little further on, on catching sight of a group of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53763:comfortable-looking persons, who seemed to be landed proprietors, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:53765:of philosophical bile as they passed:
tests/les_miserables.txt:53769:eat it, that’s what they do! As much as their bellies will hold.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53779:open street, is so much of a public function that Gavroche felt his
tests/les_miserables.txt:53780:fervor increasing with every moment. Amid the scraps of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53781:Marseillaise which he was singing, he shouted:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:53784:with rheumatism, but I’m satisfied, citizens. All that the bourgeois
tests/les_miserables.txt:53786:couplets. What are the police spies? Dogs. And I’d just like to have
tests/les_miserables.txt:53789:simmering. It’s time to skim the pot. Forward march, men! Let an impure
tests/les_miserables.txt:53790:blood inundate the furrows! I give my days to my country, I shall never
tests/les_miserables.txt:53791:see my concubine more, Nini, finished, yes, Nini? But never mind! Long
tests/les_miserables.txt:53792:live joy! Let’s fight, crebleu! I’ve had enough of despotism.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53795:At that moment, the horse of a lancer of the National Guard having
tests/les_miserables.txt:53796:fallen, Gavroche laid his pistol on the pavement, and picked up the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53797:man, then he assisted in raising the horse. After which he picked up
tests/les_miserables.txt:53798:his pistol and resumed his way. In the Rue de Thorigny, all was peace
tests/les_miserables.txt:53799:and silence. This apathy, peculiar to the Marais, presented a contrast
tests/les_miserables.txt:53800:with the vast surrounding uproar. Four gossips were chatting in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53803:Scotland has trios of witches, Paris has quartettes of old gossiping
tests/les_miserables.txt:53804:hags; and the “Thou shalt be King” could be quite as mournfully hurled
tests/les_miserables.txt:53805:at Bonaparte in the Carrefour Baudoyer as at Macbeth on the heath of
tests/les_miserables.txt:53806:Armuyr. The croak would be almost identical.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53809:own concerns. Three of them were portresses, and the fourth was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53810:rag-picker with her basket on her back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53812:All four of them seemed to be standing at the four corners of old age,
tests/les_miserables.txt:53813:which are decrepitude, decay, ruin, and sadness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53815:The rag-picker was humble. In this open-air society, it is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53816:rag-picker who salutes and the portress who patronizes. This is caused
tests/les_miserables.txt:53817:by the corner for refuse, which is fat or lean, according to the will
tests/les_miserables.txt:53818:of the portresses, and after the fancy of the one who makes the heap.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53821:This rag-picker was a grateful creature, and she smiled, with what a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53824:“Ah, by the way, is your cat still cross?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53827:“Good gracious, cats are naturally the enemies of dogs, you know. It’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:53828:the dogs who complain.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53834:“But the fleas from a cat don’t go after people.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53838:there were so many dogs that it was necessary to put it in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53840:sheep that drew the little carriage of the King of Rome. Do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:53844:“I liked the Duc de Bordeau better.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53853:“Ah! don’t mention it, the butcher’s shop is a horror. A horrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:53854:horror—one can’t afford anything but the poor cuts nowadays.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53857:Here the rag-picker interposed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:53866:“Ah, that’s true,” replied the rag-picker, with deference, “I have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53870:A pause succeeded, and the rag-picker, yielding to that necessity for
tests/les_miserables.txt:53871:boasting which lies at the bottom of man, added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:53873:“In the morning, on my return home, I pick over my basket, I sort my
tests/les_miserables.txt:53875:cores and stalks in a bucket, the linen in my cupboard, the woollen
tests/les_miserables.txt:53876:stuff in my commode, the old papers in the corner of the window, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53878:fireplace, the old shoes behind my door, and the bones under my bed.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53881:Gavroche had stopped behind her and was listening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53883:“Old ladies,” said he, “what do you mean by talking politics?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53886:He was assailed by a broadside, composed of a quadruple howl.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53888:“Here’s another rascal.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53901:Gavroche disdainfully contented himself, by way of reprisal, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:53904:The rag-picker cried:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:53906:“You malicious, bare-pawed little wretch!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53909:The one who answered to the name of Patagon clapped her hands together
tests/les_miserables.txt:53912:“There’s going to be evil doings, that’s certain. The errand-boy next
tests/les_miserables.txt:53915:had a gun on his arm. Mame Bacheux says, that last week there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53916:revolution at—at—at—where’s the calf!—at Pontoise. And then, there you
tests/les_miserables.txt:53917:see him, that horrid scamp, with his pistol! It seems that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53918:Célestins are full of pistols. What do you suppose the Government can
tests/les_miserables.txt:53920:contrive ways of upsetting the world, when we had just begun to get a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53923:going to make tobacco dearer. It’s infamous! And I shall certainly go
tests/les_miserables.txt:53924:to see him beheaded on the guillotine, the wretch!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53927:“You’ve got the sniffles, old lady,” said Gavroche. “Blow your
tests/les_miserables.txt:53931:And he passed on. When he was in the Rue Pavée, the rag-picker occurred
tests/les_miserables.txt:53939:All at once, he heard a shout behind him; it was the portress Patagon
tests/les_miserables.txt:53941:distance and crying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:53946:“Oh! Come now,” said Gavroche, “I don’t care a brass farthing for
tests/les_miserables.txt:53953:“Forward march to the battle!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:53956:And he was seized with a fit of melancholy. He gazed at his pistol with
tests/les_miserables.txt:53957:an air of reproach which seemed an attempt to appease it:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:53962:One dog may distract the attention from another dog.45 A very gaunt
tests/les_miserables.txt:53963:poodle came along at the moment. Gavroche felt compassion for him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53965:“My poor doggy,” said he, “you must have gone and swallowed a cask, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:53969:Then he directed his course towards l’Orme-Saint-Gervais.
tests/les_miserables.txt:53977:The worthy hair-dresser who had chased from his shop the two little
tests/les_miserables.txt:53978:fellows to whom Gavroche had opened the paternal interior of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53983:the Emperor. Thence sprang up a conversation between barber and soldier
tests/les_miserables.txt:53984:which Prudhomme, had he been present, would have enriched with
tests/les_miserables.txt:53985:arabesques, and which he would have entitled: “Dialogue between the
tests/les_miserables.txt:53997:“On the day when he gave me my cross, I noticed his beast. It was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53998:racing mare, perfectly white. Her ears were very wide apart, her saddle
tests/les_miserables.txt:53999:deep, a fine head marked with a black star, a very long neck, strongly
tests/les_miserables.txt:54000:articulated knees, prominent ribs, oblique shoulders and a powerful
tests/les_miserables.txt:54001:crupper. A little more than fifteen hands in height.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54009:The hair-dresser felt, that after this observation, a short silence
tests/les_miserables.txt:54010:would be fitting, so he conformed himself to it, and then went on:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54012:“The Emperor was never wounded but once, was he, sir?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54015:The old soldier replied with the calm and sovereign tone of a man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:54026:received two sabre-blows on the back of my neck, a bullet in the right
tests/les_miserables.txt:54029:lance-thrusts, no matter where, at Lutzen a splinter of a shell crushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:54030:one of my fingers. Ah! and then at Waterloo, a ball from a biscaïen in
tests/les_miserables.txt:54034:“How fine that is!” exclaimed the hair-dresser, in Pindaric accents,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54036:bed, of an illness, slowly, a bit by bit each day, with drugs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54037:cataplasms, syringes, medicines, I should prefer to receive a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54038:cannon-ball in my belly!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54043:He had hardly spoken when a fearful crash shook the shop. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:54044:show-window had suddenly been fractured.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54048:“Ah, good God!” he exclaimed, “it’s one of them!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54054:“A cannon-ball.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54059:And he picked up something that was rolling about the floor. It was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54062:The hair-dresser ran to the broken window and beheld Gavroche fleeing
tests/les_miserables.txt:54063:at the full speed, towards the Marché Saint-Jean. As he passed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54064:hair-dresser’s shop Gavroche, who had the two brats still in his mind,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54069:“that fellow returns and does mischief for the pure pleasure of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54079:In the meantime, in the Marché Saint-Jean, where the post had already
tests/les_miserables.txt:54080:been disarmed, Gavroche had just “effected a junction” with a band led
tests/les_miserables.txt:54081:by Enjolras, Courfeyrac, Combeferre, and Feuilly. They were armed after
tests/les_miserables.txt:54085:two pistols which his unbuttoned coat allowed to be seen, Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:54086:Prouvaire an old cavalry musket, Bahorel a rifle; Courfeyrac was
tests/les_miserables.txt:54087:brandishing an unsheathed sword-cane. Feuilly, with a naked sword in
tests/les_miserables.txt:54088:his hand, marched at their head shouting: “Long live Poland!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54091:They reached the Quai Morland. Cravatless, hatless, breathless, soaked
tests/les_miserables.txt:54092:by the rain, with lightning in their eyes. Gavroche accosted them
tests/les_miserables.txt:54093:calmly:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54098:“Come along,” said Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54100:Behind Feuilly marched, or rather bounded, Bahorel, who was like a fish
tests/les_miserables.txt:54101:in water in a riot. He wore a scarlet waistcoat, and indulged in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54102:sort of words which break everything. His waistcoat astounded a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54103:passer-by, who cried in bewilderment:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54110:hat inspires me with no alarm. Take my advice, bourgeois, let’s leave
tests/les_miserables.txt:54111:fear of the red to horned cattle.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54114:He caught sight of a corner of the wall on which was placarded the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:54115:peaceable sheet of paper in the world, a permission to eat eggs, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54116:Lenten admonition addressed by the Archbishop of Paris to his “flock.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54119:Bahorel exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54121:“‘Flock’; a polite way of saying geese.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54124:And he tore the charge from the nail. This conquered Gavroche. From
tests/les_miserables.txt:54125:that instant Gavroche set himself to study Bahorel.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54128:charge alone, he is not the person with whom we have to deal, you are
tests/les_miserables.txt:54129:wasting your wrath to no purpose. Take care of your supply. One does
tests/les_miserables.txt:54133:“Each one in his own fashion, Enjolras,” retorted Bahorel. “This
tests/les_miserables.txt:54134:bishop’s prose shocks me; I want to eat eggs without being permitted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54135:Your style is the hot and cold; I am amusing myself. Besides, I’m not
tests/les_miserables.txt:54136:wasting myself, I’m getting a start; and if I tore down that charge,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54137:Hercle! ’twas only to whet my appetite.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54140:This word, _Hercle_, struck Gavroche. He sought all occasions for
tests/les_miserables.txt:54144:“What does _Hercle_ mean?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54149:“It means cursed name of a dog, in Latin.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54152:Here Bahorel recognized at a window a pale young man with a black beard
tests/les_miserables.txt:54153:who was watching them as they passed, probably a Friend of the A B C.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54156:“Quick, cartridges, _para bellum_.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54159:“A fine man! that’s true,” said Gavroche, who now understood Latin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54161:A tumultuous retinue accompanied them,—students, artists, young men
tests/les_miserables.txt:54163:clubs and bayonets; some, like Combeferre, with pistols thrust into
tests/les_miserables.txt:54171:Gavroche caught sight of him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54173:“Keksekça?” said he to Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54186:Let us recount what had taken place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54189:public storehouses, at the moment when the dragoons had made their
tests/les_miserables.txt:54190:charge. Enjolras, Courfeyrac, and Combeferre were among those who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:54191:taken to the Rue Bassompierre, shouting: “To the barricades!” In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54193:attracted their attention was that the goodman was walking in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54194:zig-zag, as though he were intoxicated. Moreover, he had his hat in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:54196:pretty briskly at the very time. Courfeyrac had recognized Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:54197:Mabeuf. He knew him through having many times accompanied Marius as far
tests/les_miserables.txt:54198:as his door. As he was acquainted with the peaceful and more than timid
tests/les_miserables.txt:54199:habits of the old beadle-book-collector, and was amazed at the sight of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54200:him in the midst of that uproar, a couple of paces from the cavalry
tests/les_miserables.txt:54201:charges, almost in the midst of a fusillade, hatless in the rain, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:54202:strolling about among the bullets, he had accosted him, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54203:following dialogue had been exchanged between the rioter of fire and
tests/les_miserables.txt:54204:the octogenarian:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54224:“Firing from cannon.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54237:uttered a word. His step had suddenly become firm; artisans had offered
tests/les_miserables.txt:54238:him their arms; he had refused with a sign of the head. He advanced
tests/les_miserables.txt:54239:nearly to the front rank of the column, with the movement of a man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:54240:is marching and the countenance of a man who is sleeping.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54242:“What a fierce old fellow!” muttered the students. The rumor spread
tests/les_miserables.txt:54244:regicide. The mob had turned in through the Rue de la Verrerie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54246:Little Gavroche marched in front with that deafening song which made of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54251:“Voici la lune qui paraît,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54267:“Et ces deux pauvres petits loups,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54275:“L’un jurait et l’autre sacrait.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54284:They directed their course towards Saint-Merry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54294:mien was remarked by Courfeyrac, Enjolras, and Combeferre, but whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:54295:none of them knew, joined them. Gavroche, who was occupied in singing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54300:It chanced that in the Rue de la Verrerie, they passed in front of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54301:Courfeyrac’s door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54303:“This happens just right,” said Courfeyrac, “I have forgotten my purse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54310:He also seized a large square coffer, of the dimensions of a large
tests/les_miserables.txt:54311:valise, which was concealed under his soiled linen.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54313:As he descended again at a run, the portress hailed him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54315:“Monsieur de Courfeyrac!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54323:“Why, you know perfectly well, I’m the concierge; my name is Mother
tests/les_miserables.txt:54327:“Well, if you call me Monsieur de Courfeyrac again, I shall call you
tests/les_miserables.txt:54346:“The devil!” ejaculated Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54351:At the same time, a sort of pale, thin, small, freckled, and youthful
tests/les_miserables.txt:54352:artisan, clad in a tattered blouse and patched trousers of ribbed
tests/les_miserables.txt:54353:velvet, and who had rather the air of a girl accoutred as a man than of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54354:a man, emerged from the lodge and said to Courfeyrac in a voice which
tests/les_miserables.txt:54355:was not the least in the world like a woman’s voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54369:And Courfeyrac added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54379:“Because.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54388:“Would you like to have me carry your coffer for you?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54391:“I am going to the barricades.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54397:“If you like!” replied Courfeyrac. “The street is free, the pavements
tests/les_miserables.txt:54401:And he made his escape at a run to join his friends. When he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:54402:rejoined them, he gave the coffer to one of them to carry. It was only
tests/les_miserables.txt:54404:actually followed them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54406:A mob does not go precisely where it intends. We have explained that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54407:gust of wind carries it away. They overshot Saint-Merry and found
tests/les_miserables.txt:54408:themselves, without precisely knowing how, in the Rue Saint-Denis.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54422:near the Halles, notice on their right, opposite the Rue Mondétour, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54424:Napoleon the Great with this inscription:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54430:have no suspicion of the terrible scenes which this very spot witnessed
tests/les_miserables.txt:54433:It was there that lay the Rue de la Chanvrerie, which ancient deeds
tests/les_miserables.txt:54434:spell Chanverrerie, and the celebrated public-house called _Corinthe_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54436:The reader will remember all that has been said about the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:54437:effected at this point, and eclipsed, by the way, by the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:54438:Saint-Merry. It was on this famous barricade of the Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:54439:Chanvrerie, now fallen into profound obscurity, that we are about to
tests/les_miserables.txt:54442:May we be permitted to recur, for the sake of clearness in the recital,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54443:to the simple means which we have already employed in the case of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54444:Waterloo. Persons who wish to picture to themselves in a tolerably
tests/les_miserables.txt:54445:exact manner the constitution of the houses which stood at that epoch
tests/les_miserables.txt:54446:near the Pointe Saint-Eustache, at the northeast angle of the Halles of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54447:Paris, where to-day lies the embouchure of the Rue Rambuteau, have only
tests/les_miserables.txt:54448:to imagine an N touching the Rue Saint-Denis with its summit and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54449:Halles with its base, and whose two vertical bars should form the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:54452:old Rue Mondétour cut the three strokes of the N at the most crooked
tests/les_miserables.txt:54453:angles. So that the labyrinthine confusion of these four streets
tests/les_miserables.txt:54454:sufficed to form, on a space three fathoms square, between the Halles
tests/les_miserables.txt:54456:and the Rue des Prêcheurs on the other, seven islands of houses, oddly
tests/les_miserables.txt:54457:cut up, of varying sizes, placed crosswise and hap-hazard, and barely
tests/les_miserables.txt:54458:separated, like the blocks of stone in a dock, by narrow crannies.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54460:We say narrow crannies, and we can give no more just idea of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:54461:dark, contracted, many-angled alleys, lined with eight-story buildings.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54462:These buildings were so decrepit that, in the Rue de la Chanvrerie and
tests/les_miserables.txt:54466:skirting little stalls resembling cellars, big posts encircled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:54467:iron hoops, excessive heaps of refuse, and gates armed with enormous,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54468:century-old gratings. The Rue Rambuteau has devastated all that.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54472:expressed by the _Rue Pirouette_, which ran into the Rue Mondétour.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54475:la Chanvrerie beheld it gradually close in before him as though he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:54476:entered an elongated funnel. At the end of this street, which was very
tests/les_miserables.txt:54477:short, he found further passage barred in the direction of the Halles
tests/les_miserables.txt:54479:alley, had he not perceived on the right and left two dark cuts through
tests/les_miserables.txt:54480:which he could make his escape. This was the Rue Mondétour, which on
tests/les_miserables.txt:54481:one side ran into the Rue de Prêcheurs, and on the other into the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:54483:cul-de-sac, at the angle of the cutting on the right, there was to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:54484:seen a house which was not so tall as the rest, and which formed a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:54485:of cape in the street. It is in this house, of two stories only, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:54487:before. This tavern created a joyous noise in the very spot which old
tests/les_miserables.txt:54488:Theophilus described in the following couplet:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54494:The situation was good, and tavern-keepers succeeded each other there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54497:In the time of Mathurin Regnier, this cabaret was called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54499:sign-board, a post (_poteau_) painted rose-color. In the last century,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54500:the worthy Natoire, one of the fantastic masters nowadays despised by
tests/les_miserables.txt:54501:the stiff school, having got drunk many times in this wine-shop at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54503:gratitude, a bunch of Corinth grapes on the pink post. The keeper of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54504:the cabaret, in his joy, had changed his device and had caused to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:54505:placed in gilt letters beneath the bunch these words: “At the Bunch of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54506:Corinth Grapes” (_“Au Raisin de Corinthe”_). Hence the name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54509:Pot-aux-Roses. The last proprietor of the dynasty, Father Hucheloup, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:54510:longer acquainted even with the tradition, had the post painted blue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54513:first floor containing a billiard-table, a wooden spiral staircase
tests/les_miserables.txt:54514:piercing the ceiling, wine on the tables, smoke on the walls, candles
tests/les_miserables.txt:54515:in broad daylight,—this was the style of this cabaret. A staircase with
tests/les_miserables.txt:54516:a trap-door in the lower room led to the cellar. On the second floor
tests/les_miserables.txt:54517:were the lodgings of the Hucheloup family. They were reached by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54518:staircase which was a ladder rather than a staircase, and had for their
tests/les_miserables.txt:54519:entrance only a private door in the large room on the first floor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54520:Under the roof, in two mansard attics, were the nests for the servants.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54521:The kitchen shared the ground floor with the tap-room.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54523:Father Hucheloup had, possibly, been born a chemist, but the fact is
tests/les_miserables.txt:54524:that he was a cook; people did not confine themselves to drinking alone
tests/les_miserables.txt:54525:in his wine-shop, they also ate there. Hucheloup had invented a capital
tests/les_miserables.txt:54526:thing which could be eaten nowhere but in his house, stuffed carps,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54527:which he called _carpes au gras_. These were eaten by the light of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54528:tallow candle or of a lamp of the time of Louis XVI., on tables to
tests/les_miserables.txt:54529:which were nailed waxed cloths in lieu of table-cloths. People came
tests/les_miserables.txt:54530:thither from a distance. Hucheloup, one fine morning, had seen fit to
tests/les_miserables.txt:54531:notify passers-by of this “specialty”; he had dipped a brush in a pot
tests/les_miserables.txt:54532:of black paint, and as he was an orthographer on his own account, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:54533:well as a cook after his own fashion, he had improvised on his wall
tests/les_miserables.txt:54534:this remarkable inscription:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54538:One winter, the rain-storms and the showers had taken a fancy to
tests/les_miserables.txt:54539:obliterate the S which terminated the first word, and the G which began
tests/les_miserables.txt:54544:Time and rain assisting, a humble gastronomical announcement had become
tests/les_miserables.txt:54545:a profound piece of advice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54547:In this way it came about, that though he knew no French, Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:54548:Hucheloup understood Latin, that he had evoked philosophy from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:54549:kitchen, and that, desirous simply of effacing Lent, he had equalled
tests/les_miserables.txt:54550:Horace. And the striking thing about it was, that that also meant:
tests/les_miserables.txt:54554:Nothing of all this is in existence now. The Mondétour labyrinth was
tests/les_miserables.txt:54559:As we have already said, Corinthe was the meeting-place if not the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54560:rallying-point, of Courfeyrac and his friends. It was Grantaire who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:54561:discovered Corinthe. He had entered it on account of the _Carpe horas_,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54562:and had returned thither on account of the _Carpes au gras_. There they
tests/les_miserables.txt:54563:drank, there they ate, there they shouted; they did not pay much, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:54564:paid badly, they did not pay at all, but they were always welcome.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54565:Father Hucheloup was a jovial host.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54567:Hucheloup, that amiable man, as was just said, was a wine-shop-keeper
tests/les_miserables.txt:54568:with a moustache; an amusing variety. He always had an ill-tempered
tests/les_miserables.txt:54569:air, seemed to wish to intimidate his customers, grumbled at the people
tests/les_miserables.txt:54572:upon the word, people were always welcome there. This oddity had
tests/les_miserables.txt:54573:attracted customers to his shop, and brought him young men, who said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:54574:each other: “Come hear Father Hucheloup growl.” He had been a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54575:fencing-master. All of a sudden, he would burst out laughing. A big
tests/les_miserables.txt:54576:voice, a good fellow. He had a comic foundation under a tragic
tests/les_miserables.txt:54577:exterior, he asked nothing better than to frighten you, very much like
tests/les_miserables.txt:54578:those snuff-boxes which are in the shape of a pistol. The detonation
tests/les_miserables.txt:54581:Mother Hucheloup, his wife, was a bearded and a very homely creature.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54583:About 1830, Father Hucheloup died. With him disappeared the secret of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54584:stuffed carps. His inconsolable widow continued to keep the wine-shop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54585:But the cooking deteriorated, and became execrable; the wine, which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:54586:always been bad, became fearfully bad. Nevertheless, Courfeyrac and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:54587:friends continued to go to Corinthe,—out of pity, as Bossuet said.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54589:The Widow Hucheloup was breathless and misshapen and given to rustic
tests/les_miserables.txt:54590:recollections. She deprived them of their flatness by her
tests/les_miserables.txt:54591:pronunciation. She had a way of her own of saying things, which spiced
tests/les_miserables.txt:54592:her reminiscences of the village and of her springtime. It had formerly
tests/les_miserables.txt:54594:(_rouges-gorges_) _chanter dans les ogrepines_ (_aubépines_)—to hear
tests/les_miserables.txt:54598:large and long apartment encumbered with stools, chairs, benches, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:54599:tables, and with a crippled, lame, old billiard-table. It was reached
tests/les_miserables.txt:54600:by a spiral staircase which terminated in the corner of the room at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54601:square hole like the hatchway of a ship.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54605:comported itself as though it had but three legs—the whitewashed walls
tests/les_miserables.txt:54607:Hucheloup:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54611:On tremble à chaque instant qu’elle ne vous la mouche
tests/les_miserables.txt:54612:Et qu’un beau jour son nez ne tombe dans sa bouche.48
tests/les_miserables.txt:54615:This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54617:Mame Hucheloup, a good likeness, went and came from morning till night
tests/les_miserables.txt:54618:before this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity. Two
tests/les_miserables.txt:54620:known by any other names, helped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tables
tests/les_miserables.txt:54621:the jugs of poor wine, and the various broths which were served to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54623:and noisy, the favorite ex-sultana of the defunct Hucheloup, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:54624:homelier than any mythological monster, be it what it may; still, as it
tests/les_miserables.txt:54625:becomes the servant to always keep in the rear of the mistress, she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:54626:less homely than Mame Hucheloup. Gibelotte, tall, delicate, white with
tests/les_miserables.txt:54627:a lymphatic pallor, with circles round her eyes, and drooping lids,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54628:always languid and weary, afflicted with what may be called chronic
tests/les_miserables.txt:54634:following line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54644:elsewhere. He had a lodging, as a bird has one on a branch. The two
tests/les_miserables.txt:54646:everything in common, even Musichetta, to some extent. They were, what
tests/les_miserables.txt:54647:the subordinate monks who accompany monks are called, _bini_. On the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54649:who was all stuffed up, had a catarrh which Laigle was beginning to
tests/les_miserables.txt:54650:share. Laigle’s coat was threadbare, but Joly was well dressed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54652:It was about nine o’clock in the morning, when they opened the door of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54655:They ascended to the first floor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54657:Matelote and Gibelotte received them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54659:“Oysters, cheese, and ham,” said Laigle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54668:hatchway of the staircase, and a voice said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54670:“I am passing by. I smell from the street a delicious odor of Brie
tests/les_miserables.txt:54671:cheese. I enter.” It was Grantaire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54675:At the sight of Grantaire, Gibelotte placed two bottles of wine on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54692:“So you have a hole in your stomach?” began Laigle again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54698:“Ah, by the way, Laigle of the funeral oration, your coat is old.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54702:together, my coat and I. It has acquired all my folds, it does not bind
tests/les_miserables.txt:54704:movements, I am only conscious of it because it keeps me warm. Old
tests/les_miserables.txt:54705:coats are just like old friends.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54708:“That’s true,” ejaculated Joly, striking into the dialogue, “an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:54711:“Especially in the mouth of a man whose head is stuffed up,” said
tests/les_miserables.txt:54714:“Grantaire,” demanded Laigle, “have you just come from the boulevard?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54720:“We have just seen the head of the procession pass, Joly and I.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54725:“How quiet this street is!” exclaimed Laigle. “Who would suspect that
tests/les_miserables.txt:54727:former days there were nothing but convents here! In this neighborhood!
tests/les_miserables.txt:54730:shaven, bearded, gray, black, white, Franciscans, Minims, Capuchins,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54736:to scratch one’s self.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54739:Then he exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54741:“Bouh! I’ve just swallowed a bad oyster. Now hypochondria is taking
tests/les_miserables.txt:54743:I hate the human race. I just passed through the Rue Richelieu, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:54744:front of the big public library. That pile of oyster-shells which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:54745:called a library is disgusting even to think of. What paper! What ink!
tests/les_miserables.txt:54746:What scrawling! And all that has been written! What rascal was it who
tests/les_miserables.txt:54748:of my acquaintance, who is as beautiful as the spring, worthy to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:54749:called Floréal, and who is delighted, enraptured, as happy as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54750:angels, because a wretch yesterday, a frightful banker all spotted with
tests/les_miserables.txt:54751:small-pox, deigned to take a fancy to her! Alas! woman keeps on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54752:watch for a protector as much as for a lover; cats chase mice as well
tests/les_miserables.txt:54753:as birds. Two months ago that young woman was virtuous in an attic, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:54754:adjusted little brass rings in the eyelet-holes of corsets, what do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:54755:call it? She sewed, she had a camp bed, she dwelt beside a pot of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54756:flowers, she was contented. Now here she is a bankeress. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:54757:transformation took place last night. I met the victim this morning in
tests/les_miserables.txt:54759:to-day as she was yesterday. Her financier did not show in her face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54760:Roses have this advantage or disadvantage over women, that the traces
tests/les_miserables.txt:54761:left upon them by caterpillars are visible. Ah! there is no morality on
tests/les_miserables.txt:54762:earth. I call to witness the myrtle, the symbol of love, the laurel,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54763:the symbol of air, the olive, that ninny, the symbol of peace, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54764:apple-tree which came nearest rangling Adam with its pips, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54765:fig-tree, the grandfather of petticoats. As for right, do you know what
tests/les_miserables.txt:54766:right is? The Gauls covet Clusium, Rome protects Clusium, and demands
tests/les_miserables.txt:54769:Eques, the Volsci, and the Sabines have done to you. They were your
tests/les_miserables.txt:54772:shall not take Clusium.’ Brennus took Rome. Then he cried: ‘Væ victis!’
tests/les_miserables.txt:54774:What eagles! It makes my flesh creep.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54778:on, having hardly been interrupted by this glass of wine, of which no
tests/les_miserables.txt:54779:one, not even himself, had taken any notice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54782:grisette is an eagle. There is no more modesty in the one case than in
tests/les_miserables.txt:54784:Whatever your opinion may be in favor of the lean cock, like the Canton
tests/les_miserables.txt:54785:of Uri, or in favor of the fat cock, like the Canton of Glaris, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:54787:procession, _et cætera, et cætera_. Come now, is there going to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:54790:There is a hitch, it won’t work. Quick, a revolution! The good God has
tests/les_miserables.txt:54791:his hands perpetually black with that cart-grease. If I were in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:54792:place, I’d be perfectly simple about it, I would not wind up my
tests/les_miserables.txt:54793:mechanism every minute, I’d lead the human race in a straightforward
tests/les_miserables.txt:54796:repertory. What the rest of you call progress advances by means of two
tests/les_miserables.txt:54798:exceptional becomes necessary. The ordinary troupe suffices neither for
tests/les_miserables.txt:54800:revolutions. Great accidents are the law; the order of things cannot do
tests/les_miserables.txt:54801:without them; and, judging from the apparition of comets, one would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:54802:tempted to think that Heaven itself finds actors needed for its
tests/les_miserables.txt:54803:performance. At the moment when one expects it the least, God placards
tests/les_miserables.txt:54805:underlined by an enormous tail. And that causes the death of Cæsar.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54806:Brutus deals him a blow with a knife, and God a blow with a comet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54807:_Crac_, and behold an aurora borealis, behold a revolution, behold a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54808:great man; ’93 in big letters, Napoleon on guard, the comet of 1811 at
tests/les_miserables.txt:54810:with unexpected flashes! Boum! Boum! extraordinary show! Raise your
tests/les_miserables.txt:54812:drama. Good God, it is too much and not enough. These resources,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54813:gathered from exception, seem magnificence and poverty. My friends,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54814:Providence has come down to expedients. What does a revolution prove?
tests/les_miserables.txt:54815:That God is in a quandry. He effects a _coup d’état_ because he, God,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54816:has not been able to make both ends meet. In fact, this confirms me in
tests/les_miserables.txt:54817:my conjectures as to Jehovah’s fortune; and when I see so much distress
tests/les_miserables.txt:54819:myself without a hundred thousand livres of income, when I see human
tests/les_miserables.txt:54820:destiny, which is very badly worn, and even royal destiny, which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:54821:threadbare, witness the Prince de Condé hung, when I see winter, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:54822:is nothing but a rent in the zenith through which the wind blows, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:54823:I see so many rags even in the perfectly new purple of the morning on
tests/les_miserables.txt:54824:the crests of hills, when I see the drops of dew, those mock pearls,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54826:events patched up, and so many spots on the sun and so many holes in
tests/les_miserables.txt:54827:the moon, when I see so much misery everywhere, I suspect that God is
tests/les_miserables.txt:54828:not rich. The appearance exists, it is true, but I feel that he is hard
tests/les_miserables.txt:54830:a ball. God must not be judged from appearances. Beneath the gilding of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54831:heaven I perceive a poverty-stricken universe. Creation is bankrupt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54832:That is why I am discontented. Here it is the 4th of June, it is almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:54833:night; ever since this morning I have been waiting for daylight to
tests/les_miserables.txt:54834:come; it has not come, and I bet that it won’t come all day. This is
tests/les_miserables.txt:54835:the inexactness of an ill-paid clerk. Yes, everything is badly
tests/les_miserables.txt:54838:a tease. It’s like children, those who want them have none, and those
tests/les_miserables.txt:54841:I am of the same age as that baldy. However, I criticise, but I do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:54843:and to ease my conscience. Receive, Eternal Father, the assurance of my
tests/les_miserables.txt:54844:distinguished consideration. Ah! by all the saints of Olympus and by
tests/les_miserables.txt:54846:to say, to rebound forever, like a shuttlecock between two battledores,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54848:made to be a Turk, watching oriental houris all day long, executing
tests/les_miserables.txt:54849:those exquisite Egyptian dances, as sensuous as the dream of a chaste
tests/les_miserables.txt:54850:man, or a Beauceron peasant, or a Venetian gentleman surrounded by
tests/les_miserables.txt:54851:gentlewoman, or a petty German prince, furnishing the half of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54852:foot-soldier to the Germanic confederation, and occupying his leisure
tests/les_miserables.txt:54853:with drying his breeches on his hedge, that is to say, his frontier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54854:Those are the positions for which I was born! Yes, I have said a Turk,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54855:and I will not retract. I do not understand how people can habitually
tests/les_miserables.txt:54856:take Turks in bad part; Mohammed had his good points; respect for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54858:not insult Mohammedanism, the only religion which is ornamented with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54859:hen-roost! Now, I insist on a drink. The earth is a great piece of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54861:imbeciles, and to break each other’s profiles and to massacre each
tests/les_miserables.txt:54863:off with a creature on their arm, to breathe the immense heaps of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54864:new-mown hay in the meadows! Really, people do commit altogether too
tests/les_miserables.txt:54865:many follies. An old broken lantern which I have just seen at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54866:bric-à-brac merchant’s suggests a reflection to my mind; it is time to
tests/les_miserables.txt:54867:enlighten the human race. Yes, behold me sad again. That’s what comes
tests/les_miserables.txt:54869:melancholy once more. Oh! frightful old world. People strive, turn each
tests/les_miserables.txt:54870:other out, prostitute themselves, kill each other, and get used to it!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54873:And Grantaire, after this fit of eloquence, had a fit of coughing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:54874:which was well earned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54876:“À propos of revolution,” said Joly, “it is decidedly abberent that
tests/les_miserables.txt:54891:“Marius’ love affairs!” exclaimed Grantaire. “I can imagine it. Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:54892:is a fog, and he must have found a vapor. Marius is of the race of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54895:make a queer pair of lovers. I know just what it is like. Ecstasies in
tests/les_miserables.txt:54896:which they forget to kiss. Pure on earth, but joined in heaven. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:54900:Grantaire was attacking his second bottle and, possibly, his second
tests/les_miserables.txt:54903:yellow, with an odd phiz, a vivacious eye, an enormous amount of hair
tests/les_miserables.txt:54904:drenched with rain, and wearing a contented air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54906:The child unhesitatingly making his choice among the three, addressed
tests/les_miserables.txt:54912:“That is my nickname,” replied Laigle. “What do you want with me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54916:Mother Hucheloup?’ I said: ‘Yes, Rue Chanvrerie, the old man’s widow;’
tests/les_miserables.txt:54926:This made twenty sous, which Laigle handed to the lad.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54928:“Thank you, sir,” said the urchin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54932:“Navet, Gavroche’s friend.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54939:The child replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54941:“I can’t, I belong in the procession, I’m the one to shout ‘Down with
tests/les_miserables.txt:54942:Polignac!’”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54945:And executing a prolonged scrape of his foot behind him, which is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54946:most respectful of all possible salutes, he took his departure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54948:The child gone, Grantaire took the word:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54951:gamin species. The notary’s gamin is called Skip-the-Gutter, the cook’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:54952:gamin is called a scullion, the baker’s gamin is called a _mitron_, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54953:lackey’s gamin is called a groom, the marine gamin is called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:54954:cabin-boy, the soldier’s gamin is called the drummer-boy, the painter’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:54955:gamin is called paint-grinder, the tradesman’s gamin is called an
tests/les_miserables.txt:54956:errand-boy, the courtesan gamin is called the minion, the kingly gamin
tests/les_miserables.txt:54957:is called the dauphin, the god gamin is called the bambino.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54960:In the meantime, Laigle was engaged in reflection; he said half aloud:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:54969:“Shall we go?” ejaculated Bossuet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54979:“Conclusion: we remain,” said Laigle. “Well, then, let us drink.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54983:“Ah! the riot, I am with you!” cried Joly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:54987:“Now we’re going to touch up the revolution of 1830. As a matter of
tests/les_miserables.txt:54988:fact, it does hurt the people along the seams.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:54991:“I don’t think much of your revolution,” said Grantaire. “I don’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:54992:execrate this Government. It is the crown tempered by the cotton
tests/les_miserables.txt:54993:night-cap. It is a sceptre ending in an umbrella. In fact, I think that
tests/les_miserables.txt:54995:royalty in two directions, he might extend the tip of the sceptre end
tests/les_miserables.txt:54999:The room was dark, large clouds had just finished the extinction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55001:one having gone off “to watch events.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55004:“Is it midday or midnight?” cried Bossuet. “You can’t see your hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:55005:before your face. Gibelotte, fetch a light.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55008:Grantaire was drinking in a melancholy way.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55012:come for me, I would have followed him. So much the worse for Enjolras!
tests/les_miserables.txt:55016:This resolution once arrived at, Bossuet, Joly, and Grantaire did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:55017:stir from the wine-shop. By two o’clock in the afternoon, the table at
tests/les_miserables.txt:55018:which they sat was covered with empty bottles. Two candles were burning
tests/les_miserables.txt:55019:on it, one in a flat copper candlestick which was perfectly green, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55020:other in the neck of a cracked carafe. Grantaire had seduced Joly and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55021:Bossuet to wine; Bossuet and Joly had conducted Grantaire back towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:55022:cheerfulness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55025:of dreams, ever since midday. Wine enjoys only a conventional
tests/les_miserables.txt:55026:popularity with serious drinkers. There is, in fact, in the matter of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55027:inebriety, white magic and black magic; wine is only white magic.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55028:Grantaire was a daring drinker of dreams. The blackness of a terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:55030:attracted him. He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the beerglass.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55033:recourse to that fearful mixture of brandy, stout, absinthe, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:55034:produces the most terrible of lethargies. It is of these three vapors,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55035:beer, brandy, and absinthe, that the lead of the soul is composed. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:55036:are three grooms; the celestial butterfly is drowned in them; and there
tests/les_miserables.txt:55037:are formed there in a membranous smoke, vaguely condensed into the wing
tests/les_miserables.txt:55038:of the bat, three mute furies, Nightmare, Night, and Death, which hover
tests/les_miserables.txt:55039:about the slumbering Psyche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55041:Grantaire had not yet reached that lamentable phase; far from it. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:55042:was tremendously gay, and Bossuet and Joly retorted. They clinked
tests/les_miserables.txt:55043:glasses. Grantaire added to the eccentric accentuation of words and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55044:ideas, a peculiarity of gesture; he rested his left fist on his knee
tests/les_miserables.txt:55045:with dignity, his arm forming a right angle, and, with cravat untied,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55049:“Let the doors of the palace be thrown open! Let every one be a member
tests/les_miserables.txt:55050:of the French Academy and have the right to embrace Madame Hucheloup.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55054:And turning to Madame Hucheloup, he added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55056:“Woman ancient and consecrated by use, draw near that I may contemplate
tests/les_miserables.txt:55060:And Joly exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55063:has already devoured, since this bording, in wild prodigality, two
tests/les_miserables.txt:55064:francs and ninety-five centibes.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55070:them on the table in the guise of candles?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55075:He was seated on the sill of the open window, wetting his back in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55078:All at once, he heard a tumult behind him, hurried footsteps, cries of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55081:Gavroche with his pistol, Feuilly with his sword, Courfeyrac with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:55083:gun, Bahorel with his gun, and the whole armed and stormy rabble which
tests/les_miserables.txt:55087:improvised a speaking-trumpet from his two hands placed around his
tests/les_miserables.txt:55090:“Courfeyrac! Courfeyrac! Hohée!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55093:Courfeyrac heard the shout, caught sight of Bossuet, and advanced a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:55094:paces into the Rue de la Chanvrerie, shouting: “What do you want?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55095:which crossed a “Where are you going?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55098:“To make a barricade,” replied Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55100:“Well, here! This is a good place! Make it here!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55103:“That’s true, Aigle,” said Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55105:And at a signal from Courfeyrac, the mob flung themselves into the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:55114:The spot was, in fact, admirably adapted, the entrance to the street
tests/les_miserables.txt:55115:widened out, the other extremity narrowed together into a pocket
tests/les_miserables.txt:55116:without exit. Corinthe created an obstacle, the Rue Mondétour was
tests/les_miserables.txt:55117:easily barricaded on the right and the left, no attack was possible
tests/les_miserables.txt:55118:except from the Rue Saint-Denis, that is to say, in front, and in full
tests/les_miserables.txt:55119:sight. Bossuet had the comprehensive glance of a fasting Hannibal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55122:There was not a passer-by who did not get out of sight. In the space of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55124:area-doors, windows, blinds, attic skylights, shutters of every
tests/les_miserables.txt:55125:description were closed, from the ground floor to the roof. A terrified
tests/les_miserables.txt:55126:old woman fixed a mattress in front of her window on two clothes-poles
tests/les_miserables.txt:55127:for drying linen, in order to deaden the effect of musketry. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:55130:Hucheloup.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55132:Bossuet had gone down to meet Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55134:Joly, who had placed himself at the window, exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55136:“Courfeyrac, you ought to have brought an umbrella. You will gatch
tests/les_miserables.txt:55140:In the meantime, in the space of a few minutes, twenty iron bars had
tests/les_miserables.txt:55141:been wrenched from the grated front of the wine-shop, ten fathoms of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55142:street had been unpaved; Gavroche and Bahorel had seized in its
tests/les_miserables.txt:55143:passage, and overturned, the dray of a lime-dealer named Anceau; this
tests/les_miserables.txt:55144:dray contained three barrels of lime, which they placed beneath the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55145:piles of paving-stones: Enjolras raised the cellar trap, and all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55146:widow Hucheloup’s empty casks were used to flank the barrels of lime;
tests/les_miserables.txt:55147:Feuilly, with his fingers skilled in painting the delicate sticks of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55148:fans, had backed up the barrels and the dray with two massive heaps of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55149:blocks of rough stone. Blocks which were improvised like the rest and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55150:procured no one knows where. The beams which served as props were torn
tests/les_miserables.txt:55151:from the neighboring house-fronts and laid on the casks. When Bossuet
tests/les_miserables.txt:55152:and Courfeyrac turned round, half the street was already barred with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55154:populace for building everything that is built by demolishing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55157:came loaded with rubbish. Her lassitude helped on the barricade. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:55158:served the barricade as she would have served wine, with a sleepy air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55164:the conductor, and returned, leading the vehicle and the horses by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55167:“Omnibuses,” said he, “do not pass the Corinthe. _Non licet omnibus
tests/les_miserables.txt:55173:completed the bar across the street.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55175:Mame Hucheloup, quite upset, had taken refuge in the first story.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55177:Her eyes were vague, and stared without seeing anything, and she cried
tests/les_miserables.txt:55181:“The end of the world has come,” she muttered.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55183:Joly deposited a kiss on Mame Hucheloup’s fat, red, wrinkled neck, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55185:neck as an infinitely delicate thing.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55189:had mounted to the first floor once more, Grantaire seized her round
tests/les_miserables.txt:55192:“Matelote is homely!” he cried: “Matelote is of a dream of ugliness!
tests/les_miserables.txt:55193:Matelote is a chimæra. This is the secret of her birth: a Gothic
tests/les_miserables.txt:55194:Pygmalion, who was making gargoyles for cathedrals, fell in love with
tests/les_miserables.txt:55196:give it life, and this produced Matelote. Look at her, citizens! She
tests/les_miserables.txt:55197:has chromate-of-lead-colored hair, like Titian’s mistress, and she is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55199:contains a hero. As for Mother Hucheloup, she’s an old warrior. Look at
tests/les_miserables.txt:55200:her moustaches! She inherited them from her husband. A hussar indeed!
tests/les_miserables.txt:55203:there are fifteen intermediary acids between margaric acid and formic
tests/les_miserables.txt:55204:acid; however, that is a matter of perfect indifference to me.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55205:Gentlemen, my father always detested me because I could not understand
tests/les_miserables.txt:55206:mathematics. I understand only love and liberty. I am Grantaire, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55207:good fellow. Having never had any money, I never acquired the habit of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55208:it, and the result is that I have never lacked it; but, if I had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:55209:rich, there would have been no more poor people! You would have seen!
tests/les_miserables.txt:55210:Oh, if the kind hearts only had fat purses, how much better things
tests/les_miserables.txt:55211:would go! I picture myself Jesus Christ with Rothschild’s fortune! How
tests/les_miserables.txt:55212:much good he would do! Matelote, embrace me! You are voluptuous and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55213:timid! You have cheeks which invite the kiss of a sister, and lips
tests/les_miserables.txt:55214:which claim the kiss of a lover.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55217:“Hold your tongue, you cask!” said Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55221:“I am the capitoul52 and the master of the floral games!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55224:Enjolras, who was standing on the crest of the barricade, gun in hand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55225:raised his beautiful, austere face. Enjolras, as the reader knows, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:55226:something of the Spartan and of the Puritan in his composition. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:55231:somewhere else than here. This is the place for enthusiasm, not for
tests/les_miserables.txt:55232:drunkenness. Don’t disgrace the barricade!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55235:This angry speech produced a singular effect on Grantaire. One would
tests/les_miserables.txt:55236:have said that he had had a glass of cold water flung in his face. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:55240:Enjolras with indescribable gentleness, and said to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55245:“Go and sleep somewhere else,” cried Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55255:“Grantaire, you are incapable of believing, of thinking, of willing, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55265:heavily on the table, and, as is the usual effect of the second period
tests/les_miserables.txt:55266:of inebriety, into which Enjolras had roughly and abruptly thrust him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55275:Bahorel, in ecstasies over the barricade, shouted:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55277:“Here’s the street in its low-necked dress! How well it looks!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55280:Courfeyrac, as he demolished the wine-shop to some extent, sought to
tests/les_miserables.txt:55281:console the widowed proprietress.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55283:“Mother Hucheloup, weren’t you complaining the other day because you
tests/les_miserables.txt:55284:had had a notice served on you for infringing the law, because
tests/les_miserables.txt:55285:Gibelotte shook a counterpane out of your window?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55288:“Yes, my good Monsieur Courfeyrac. Ah! good Heavens, are you going to
tests/les_miserables.txt:55290:counterpane, and also for a pot of flowers which fell from the attic
tests/les_miserables.txt:55291:window into the street, that the government collected a fine of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55292:hundred francs. If that isn’t an abomination, what is!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55295:“Well, Mother Hucheloup, we are avenging you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55298:Mother Hucheloup did not appear to understand very clearly the benefit
tests/les_miserables.txt:55299:which she was to derive from these reprisals made on her account. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:55300:was satisfied after the manner of that Arab woman, who, having received
tests/les_miserables.txt:55301:a box on the ear from her husband, went to complain to her father, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55302:cried for vengeance, saying: “Father, you owe my husband affront for
tests/les_miserables.txt:55303:affront.” The father asked: “On which cheek did you receive the blow?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55304:“On the left cheek.” The father slapped her right cheek and said: “Now
tests/les_miserables.txt:55306:ears, and that I have accordingly boxed his wife’s.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55309:The rain had ceased. Recruits had arrived. Workmen had brought under
tests/les_miserables.txt:55310:their blouses a barrel of powder, a basket containing bottles of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55311:vitriol, two or three carnival torches, and a basket filled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:55313:recent, having taken place on the 1st of May. It was said that these
tests/les_miserables.txt:55314:munitions came from a grocer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine named Pépin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55316:lantern corresponding to one in the Rue Saint-Denis, and all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55318:Prêcheurs, and de la Grande and de la Petite-Truanderie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55320:Enjolras, Combeferre, and Courfeyrac directed everything. Two
tests/les_miserables.txt:55321:barricades were now in process of construction at once, both of them
tests/les_miserables.txt:55323:shut off the Rue de la Chanvrerie, the other closed the Rue Mondétour,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55324:on the side of the Rue de Cygne. This last barricade, which was very
tests/les_miserables.txt:55325:narrow, was constructed only of casks and paving-stones. There were
tests/les_miserables.txt:55327:way, they had effected a wholesale loan from an armorer’s shop.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55329:Nothing could be more bizarre and at the same time more motley than
tests/les_miserables.txt:55330:this troop. One had a round-jacket, a cavalry sabre, and two
tests/les_miserables.txt:55336:over his coat the cross-belt and cartridge-box of a National Guardsman,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55337:the cover of the cartridge-box being ornamented with this inscription
tests/les_miserables.txt:55338:in red worsted: _Public Order_. There were a great many guns bearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:55339:the numbers of the legions, few hats, no cravats, many bare arms, some
tests/les_miserables.txt:55340:pikes. Add to this, all ages, all sorts of faces, small, pale young
tests/les_miserables.txt:55342:each other, they discussed the possible chances. That they would
tests/les_miserables.txt:55343:receive succor about three o’clock in the morning—that they were sure
tests/les_miserables.txt:55344:of one regiment, that Paris would rise. Terrible sayings with which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:55345:mingled a sort of cordial joviality. One would have pronounced them
tests/les_miserables.txt:55346:brothers, but they did not know each other’s names. Great perils have
tests/les_miserables.txt:55347:this fine characteristic, that they bring to light the fraternity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55348:strangers. A fire had been lighted in the kitchen, and there they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:55351:drank. Caps and buckshot were mixed pell-mell on the tables with
tests/les_miserables.txt:55352:glasses of wine. In the billiard-hall, Mame Hucheloup, Matelote, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55353:Gibelotte, variously modified by terror, which had stupefied one,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55355:dish-cloths and making lint; three insurgents were assisting them,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55356:three bushy-haired, jolly blades with beards and moustaches, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:55357:plucked away at the linen with the fingers of seamstresses and who made
tests/les_miserables.txt:55360:The man of lofty stature whom Courfeyrac, Combeferre, and Enjolras had
tests/les_miserables.txt:55361:observed at the moment when he joined the mob at the corner of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:55362:des Billettes, was at work on the smaller barricade and was making
tests/les_miserables.txt:55363:himself useful there. Gavroche was working on the larger one. As for
tests/les_miserables.txt:55364:the young man who had been waiting for Courfeyrac at his lodgings, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55368:Gavroche, completely carried away and radiant, had undertaken to get
tests/les_miserables.txt:55369:everything in readiness. He went, came, mounted, descended, re-mounted,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55370:whistled, and sparkled. He seemed to be there for the encouragement of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55371:all. Had he any incentive? Yes, certainly, his poverty; had he wings?
tests/les_miserables.txt:55372:yes, certainly, his joy. Gavroche was a whirlwind. He was constantly
tests/les_miserables.txt:55373:visible, he was incessantly audible. He filled the air, as he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:55374:everywhere at once. He was a sort of almost irritating ubiquity; no
tests/les_miserables.txt:55375:halt was possible with him. The enormous barricade felt him on its
tests/les_miserables.txt:55376:haunches. He troubled the loungers, he excited the idle, he reanimated
tests/les_miserables.txt:55379:pricking a student, now biting an artisan; he alighted, paused, flew
tests/les_miserables.txt:55382:company; a fly on the immense revolutionary coach.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55384:Perpetual motion was in his little arms and perpetual clamor in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:55387:“Courage! more paving-stones! more casks! more machines! Where are you
tests/les_miserables.txt:55388:now? A hod of plaster for me to stop this hole with! Your barricade is
tests/les_miserables.txt:55389:very small. It must be carried up. Put everything on it, fling
tests/les_miserables.txt:55390:everything there, stick it all in. Break down the house. A barricade is
tests/les_miserables.txt:55394:This elicited an exclamation from the workers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55396:“A glass door? what do you expect us to do with a glass door,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55397:tubercle?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55400:“Hercules yourselves!” retorted Gavroche. “A glass door is an excellent
tests/les_miserables.txt:55401:thing in a barricade. It does not prevent an attack, but it prevents
tests/les_miserables.txt:55403:there were broken bottles? A glass door cuts the corns of the National
tests/les_miserables.txt:55404:Guard when they try to mount on the barricade. Pardi! glass is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55405:treacherous thing. Well, you haven’t a very wildly lively imagination,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55406:comrades.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55416:“Come now!” said Gavroche, “why not? I had one in 1830 when we had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55422:“When there are enough for the men, we will give some to the children.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55425:Gavroche wheeled round haughtily, and answered:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55432:“Greenhorn!” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55435:created a diversion! Gavroche shouted to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55438:old country of ours?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55449:The journals of the day which said that that _nearly impregnable
tests/les_miserables.txt:55450:structure_, of the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, as they call
tests/les_miserables.txt:55451:it, reached to the level of the first floor, were mistaken. The fact
tests/les_miserables.txt:55452:is, that it did not exceed an average height of six or seven feet. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:55453:was built in such a manner that the combatants could, at their will,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55454:either disappear behind it or dominate the barrier and even scale its
tests/les_miserables.txt:55455:crest by means of a quadruple row of paving-stones placed on top of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55456:each other and arranged as steps in the interior. On the outside, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55457:front of the barricade, composed of piles of paving-stones and casks
tests/les_miserables.txt:55458:bound together by beams and planks, which were entangled in the wheels
tests/les_miserables.txt:55459:of Anceau’s dray and of the overturned omnibus, had a bristling and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55460:inextricable aspect.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55463:between the wall of the houses and the extremity of the barricade which
tests/les_miserables.txt:55465:point. The pole of the omnibus was placed upright and held up with
tests/les_miserables.txt:55467:barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55469:The little Mondétour barricade, hidden behind the wine-shop building,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55470:was not visible. The two barricades united formed a veritable redoubt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55471:Enjolras and Courfeyrac had not thought fit to barricade the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:55472:fragment of the Rue Mondétour which opens through the Rue des Prêcheurs
tests/les_miserables.txt:55474:communication with the outside, and not entertaining much fear of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:55475:attack through the dangerous and difficult street of the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:55476:Prêcheurs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55478:With the exception of this issue which was left free, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:55479:constituted what Folard in his strategical style would have termed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55480:branch and taking into account, also, the narrow cutting arranged on
tests/les_miserables.txt:55481:the Rue de la Chanvrerie, the interior of the barricade, where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55482:wine-shop formed a salient angle, presented an irregular square, closed
tests/les_miserables.txt:55483:on all sides. There existed an interval of twenty paces between the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55484:grand barrier and the lofty houses which formed the background of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55485:street, so that one might say that the barricade rested on these
tests/les_miserables.txt:55486:houses, all inhabited, but closed from top to bottom.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55488:All this work was performed without any hindrance, in less than an
tests/les_miserables.txt:55490:cap or a single bayonet make their appearance. The very bourgeois who
tests/les_miserables.txt:55491:still ventured at this hour of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55492:glance at the Rue de la Chanvrerie, caught sight of the barricade, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55493:redoubled their pace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55495:The two barricades being finished, and the flag run up, a table was
tests/les_miserables.txt:55496:dragged out of the wine-shop; and Courfeyrac mounted on the table.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55497:Enjolras brought the square coffer, and Courfeyrac opened it. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:55498:coffer was filled with cartridges. When the mob saw the cartridges, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55499:tremor ran through the bravest, and a momentary silence ensued.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55501:Courfeyrac distributed them with a smile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55503:Each one received thirty cartridges. Many had powder, and set about
tests/les_miserables.txt:55504:making others with the bullets which they had run. As for the barrel of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55508:The alarm beat which ran through all Paris, did not cease, but it had
tests/les_miserables.txt:55509:finally come to be nothing more than a monotonous noise to which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:55511:drew near, with melancholy undulations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55513:They loaded the guns and carbines, all together, without haste, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:55515:barricades, one in the Rue de la Chanvrerie, the second in the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:55516:Prêcheurs, the third at the corner of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55518:Then, the barricades having been built, the posts assigned, the guns
tests/les_miserables.txt:55520:redoubtable streets through which no one passed any longer, surrounded
tests/les_miserables.txt:55521:by those dumb houses which seemed dead and in which no human movement
tests/les_miserables.txt:55522:palpitated, enveloped in the deepening shades of twilight which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:55523:drawing on, in the midst of that silence through which something could
tests/les_miserables.txt:55524:be felt advancing, and which had about it something tragic and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55535:We must needs tell, since this is a matter of history.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55537:While the men made bullets and the women lint, while a large saucepan
tests/les_miserables.txt:55539:glowing brazier, while the sentinels watched, weapon in hand, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55540:barricade, while Enjolras, whom it was impossible to divert, kept an
tests/les_miserables.txt:55541:eye on the sentinels, Combeferre, Courfeyrac, Jean Prouvaire, Feuilly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55542:Bossuet, Joly, Bahorel, and some others, sought each other out and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55543:united as in the most peaceful days of their conversations in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:55544:student life, and, in one corner of this wine-shop which had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:55545:converted into a casement, a couple of paces distant from the redoubt
tests/les_miserables.txt:55546:which they had built, with their carbines loaded and primed resting
tests/les_miserables.txt:55547:against the backs of their chairs, these fine young fellows, so close
tests/les_miserables.txt:55548:to a supreme hour, began to recite love verses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55552:Vous rappelez-vous notre douce vie,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55554:Et que nous n’avions au cœur d’autre envie
tests/les_miserables.txt:55558:Nous ne comptions pas à deux quarante ans,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55564:Foy lançait la foudre, et votre corsage
tests/les_miserables.txt:55567:Tout vous contemplait. Avocat sans causes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55573:Comme elle sent bon!  Quels cheveux à flots!
tests/les_miserables.txt:55574:Sous son mantelet elle cache une aile,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55575:Son bonnet charmant est à peine éclos.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55577:J’errais avec toi, pressant ton bras souple.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55578:Les passants croyaient que l’amour charmé
tests/les_miserables.txt:55579:Avait marié, dans notre heureux couple,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55582:Nous vivions cachés, contents, porte close,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55584:Ma bouche n’avait pas dit une chose
tests/les_miserables.txt:55585:Que déjà ton cœur avait répondu.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55587:La Sorbonne était l’endroit bucolique
tests/les_miserables.txt:55590:La carte du Tendre au pays Latin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55592:O place Maubert! O place Dauphine!
tests/les_miserables.txt:55598:Mieux que Malebranche et que Lamennais,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55599:Tu me démontrais la bonté céleste
tests/les_miserables.txt:55600:Avec une fleur que tu me donnais.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55603:O grenier doré! te lacer! te voir
tests/les_miserables.txt:55604:Aller et venir dès l’aube en chemise,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55607:Et qui donc pourrait perdre la mémoire
tests/les_miserables.txt:55608:De ces temps d’aurore et de firmament,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55610:Où l’amour bégaye un argot charmant?
tests/les_miserables.txt:55613:Tu masquais la vitre avec un jupon;
tests/les_miserables.txt:55617:Et ces grands malheurs qui nous faisaient rire!
tests/les_miserables.txt:55618:Ton manchon brûlé, ton boa perdu!
tests/les_miserables.txt:55619:Et ce cher portrait du divin Shakespeare
tests/les_miserables.txt:55622:J’étais mendiant et toi charitable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55625:Pour manger gaîment un cent de marrons.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55629:Quand tu t’en allais décoiffée et rouge,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55630:Je restai tout pâle et je crus en Dieu!
tests/les_miserables.txt:55633:Et tous ces fichus changés en chiffons?
tests/les_miserables.txt:55634:Oh que de soupirs, de nos cœurs pleins d’ombre,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55635:Se sont envolés dans les cieux profonds!53
tests/les_miserables.txt:55638:The hour, the spot, these souvenirs of youth recalled, a few stars
tests/les_miserables.txt:55639:which began to twinkle in the sky, the funeral repose of those deserted
tests/les_miserables.txt:55640:streets, the imminence of the inexorable adventure, which was in
tests/les_miserables.txt:55641:preparation, gave a pathetic charm to these verses murmured in a low
tests/les_miserables.txt:55645:In the meantime, a lamp had been lighted in the small barricade, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:55646:the large one, one of those wax torches such as are to be met with on
tests/les_miserables.txt:55647:Shrove-Tuesday in front of vehicles loaded with masks, on their way to
tests/les_miserables.txt:55648:la Courtille. These torches, as the reader has seen, came from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55651:The torch had been placed in a sort of cage of paving-stones closed on
tests/les_miserables.txt:55652:three sides to shelter it from the wind, and disposed in such a fashion
tests/les_miserables.txt:55653:that all the light fell on the flag. The street and the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:55654:remained sunk in gloom, and nothing was to be seen except the red flag
tests/les_miserables.txt:55657:This light enhanced the scarlet of the flag, with an indescribable and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55666:Night was fully come, nothing made its appearance. All that they heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:55667:was confused noises, and at intervals, fusillades; but these were rare,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55668:badly sustained and distant. This respite, which was thus prolonged,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55669:was a sign that the Government was taking its time, and collecting its
tests/les_miserables.txt:55670:forces. These fifty men were waiting for sixty thousand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55672:Enjolras felt attacked by that impatience which seizes on strong souls
tests/les_miserables.txt:55673:on the threshold of redoubtable events. He went in search of Gavroche,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55674:who had set to making cartridges in the tap-room, by the dubious light
tests/les_miserables.txt:55675:of two candles placed on the counter by way of precaution, on account
tests/les_miserables.txt:55676:of the powder which was scattered on the tables. These two candles cast
tests/les_miserables.txt:55680:Gavroche was deeply preoccupied at that moment, but not precisely with
tests/les_miserables.txt:55681:his cartridges. The man of the Rue des Billettes had just entered the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55682:tap-room and had seated himself at the table which was the least
tests/les_miserables.txt:55684:it between his legs. Gavroche, who had been, up to that moment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55685:distracted by a hundred “amusing” things, had not even seen this man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55687:When he entered, Gavroche followed him mechanically with his eyes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55688:admiring his gun; then, all at once, when the man was seated, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55689:street urchin sprang to his feet. Any one who had spied upon that man
tests/les_miserables.txt:55691:the barricade and in the band of insurgents, with singular attention;
tests/les_miserables.txt:55694:going on. The gamin approached this pensive personage, and began to
tests/les_miserables.txt:55695:step around him on tiptoe, as one walks in the vicinity of a person
tests/les_miserables.txt:55696:whom one is afraid of waking. At the same time, over his childish
tests/les_miserables.txt:55697:countenance which was, at once so impudent and so serious, so giddy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55698:so profound, so gay and so heart-breaking, passed all those grimaces of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55699:an old man which signify: Ah bah! impossible! My sight is bad! I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:55700:dreaming! can this be? no, it is not! but yes! why, no! etc. Gavroche
tests/les_miserables.txt:55701:balanced on his heels, clenched both fists in his pockets, moved his
tests/les_miserables.txt:55702:neck around like a bird, expended in a gigantic pout all the sagacity
tests/les_miserables.txt:55703:of his lower lip. He was astounded, uncertain, incredulous, convinced,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55704:dazzled. He had the mien of the chief of the eunuchs in the slave mart,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55705:discovering a Venus among the blowsy females, and the air of an amateur
tests/les_miserables.txt:55706:recognizing a Raphael in a heap of daubs. His whole being was at work,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55707:the instinct which scents out, and the intelligence which combines. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:55708:was evident that a great event had happened in Gavroche’s life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55710:It was at the most intense point of this preoccupation that Enjolras
tests/les_miserables.txt:55711:accosted him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55714:barricade, slip along close to the houses, skirmish about a bit in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55715:streets, and come back and tell me what is going on.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55718:Gavroche raised himself on his haunches.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55720:“So the little chaps are good for something! that’s very lucky! I’ll
tests/les_miserables.txt:55722:ones.” And Gavroche, raising his head and lowering his voice, added, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:55723:he indicated the man of the Rue des Billettes: “Do you see that big
tests/les_miserables.txt:55730:“He’s a police spy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55736:“It isn’t two weeks since he pulled me off the cornice of the Port
tests/les_miserables.txt:55740:Enjolras hastily quitted the urchin and murmured a few words in a very
tests/les_miserables.txt:55741:low tone to a longshoreman from the winedocks who chanced to be at
tests/les_miserables.txt:55743:accompanied by three others. The four men, four porters with broad
tests/les_miserables.txt:55744:shoulders, went and placed themselves without doing anything to attract
tests/les_miserables.txt:55745:his attention, behind the table on which the man of the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:55749:Then Enjolras approached the man and demanded of him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55755:Enjolras’ clear eyes and appeared to grasp the latter’s meaning. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:55756:smiled with a smile than which nothing more disdainful, more energetic,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55757:and more resolute could be seen in the world, and replied with haughty
tests/les_miserables.txt:55763:“You are a police spy?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55776:before Javert had time to turn round, he was collared, thrown down,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55777:pinioned and searched.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55779:They found on him a little round card pasted between two pieces of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55780:glass, and bearing on one side the arms of France, engraved, and with
tests/les_miserables.txt:55781:this motto: _Supervision and vigilance_, and on the other this note:
tests/les_miserables.txt:55782:“JAVERT, inspector of police, aged fifty-two,” and the signature of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55783:Prefect of Police of that day, M. Gisquet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55785:Besides this, he had his watch and his purse, which contained several
tests/les_miserables.txt:55786:gold pieces. They left him his purse and his watch. Under the watch, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:55788:which Enjolras unfolded, and on which he read these five lines, written
tests/les_miserables.txt:55789:in the very hand of the Prefect of Police:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55791:“As soon as his political mission is accomplished, Inspector Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:55792:will make sure, by special supervision, whether it is true that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55793:malefactors have instituted intrigues on the right bank of the Seine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55797:The search ended, they lifted Javert to his feet, bound his arms behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:55798:his back, and fastened him to that celebrated post in the middle of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55799:room which had formerly given the wine-shop its name.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55801:Gavroche, who had looked on at the whole of this scene and had approved
tests/les_miserables.txt:55805:“It’s the mouse who has caught the cat.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55808:All this was so rapidly executed, that it was all over when those about
tests/les_miserables.txt:55809:the wine-shop noticed it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55811:Javert had not uttered a single cry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55813:At the sight of Javert bound to the post, Courfeyrac, Bossuet, Joly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55814:Combeferre, and the men scattered over the two barricades came running
tests/les_miserables.txt:55817:Javert, with his back to the post, and so surrounded with ropes that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:55818:could not make a movement, raised his head with the intrepid serenity
tests/les_miserables.txt:55821:“He is a police spy,” said Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55824:barricade is taken.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55829:“Why not at once?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55841:Then he called Gavroche:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55846:“I’m going!” cried Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55851:musician, but I want the clarinet.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55855:in the large barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55864:The tragic picture which we have undertaken would not be complete, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55865:reader would not see those grand moments of social birth-pangs in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55866:revolutionary birth, which contain convulsion mingled with effort, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:55867:their exact and real relief, were we to omit, in the sketch here
tests/les_miserables.txt:55868:outlined, an incident full of epic and savage horror which occurred
tests/les_miserables.txt:55869:almost immediately after Gavroche’s departure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55871:Mobs, as the reader knows, are like a snowball, and collect as they
tests/les_miserables.txt:55872:roll along, a throng of tumultuous men. These men do not ask each other
tests/les_miserables.txt:55873:whence they come. Among the passers-by who had joined the rabble led by
tests/les_miserables.txt:55874:Enjolras, Combeferre, and Courfeyrac, there had been a person wearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:55875:the jacket of a street porter, which was very threadbare on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55876:shoulders, who gesticulated and vociferated, and who had the look of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55877:drunken savage. This man, whose name or nickname was Le Cabuc, and who
tests/les_miserables.txt:55879:was very drunk, or assumed the appearance of being so, and had seated
tests/les_miserables.txt:55880:himself with several others at a table which they had dragged outside
tests/les_miserables.txt:55881:of the wine-shop. This Cabuc, while making those who vied with him
tests/les_miserables.txt:55883:the extremity of the barricade, whose five stories commanded the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:55884:street and faced the Rue Saint-Denis. All at once he exclaimed:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:55886:“Do you know, comrades, it is from that house yonder that we must fire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55887:When we are at the windows, the deuce is in it if any one can advance
tests/les_miserables.txt:55891:“Yes, but the house is closed,” said one of the drinkers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55893:“Let us knock!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55902:Le Cabuc runs to the door, which had a very massive knocker, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55903:knocks. The door opens not. He strikes a second blow. No one answers. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:55904:third stroke. The same silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55906:“Is there any one here?” shouts Cabuc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55912:It was an ancient alley door, low, vaulted, narrow, solid, entirely of
tests/les_miserables.txt:55919:this aperture appeared the reverend and terrified face of a gray-haired
tests/les_miserables.txt:55920:old man, who was the porter, and who held a candle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55922:The man who was knocking paused.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55927:“Open!” said Cabuc.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55929:“That cannot be, gentlemen.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:55938:Le Cabuc took his gun and aimed at the porter; but as he was below, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:55954:his chin and came out at the nape of his neck, after traversing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55957:The old man fell back without a sigh. The candle fell and was
tests/les_miserables.txt:55958:extinguished, and nothing more was to be seen except a motionless head
tests/les_miserables.txt:55959:lying on the sill of the small window, and a little whitish smoke which
tests/les_miserables.txt:55962:“There!” said Le Cabuc, dropping the butt end of his gun to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55966:shoulder with the weight of an eagle’s talon, and he heard a voice
tests/les_miserables.txt:55972:The murderer turned round and saw before him Enjolras’ cold, white
tests/les_miserables.txt:55973:face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55977:He had hastened up at the sound of the discharge.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55979:He had seized Cabuc’s collar, blouse, shirt, and suspender with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:55985:the thickset and sturdy porter like a reed, and brought him to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:55988:Le Cabuc attempted to resist, but he seemed to have been seized by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55991:Enjolras, pale, with bare neck and dishevelled hair, and his woman’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:55992:face, had about him at that moment something of the antique Themis. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:55993:dilated nostrils, his downcast eyes, gave to his implacable Greek
tests/les_miserables.txt:55994:profile that expression of wrath and that expression of Chastity which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:55995:as the ancient world viewed the matter, befit Justice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:55997:The whole barricade hastened up, then all ranged themselves in a circle
tests/les_miserables.txt:55998:at a distance, feeling that it was impossible to utter a word in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:55999:presence of the thing which they were about to behold.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56001:Le Cabuc, vanquished, no longer tried to struggle, and trembled in
tests/les_miserables.txt:56004:Enjolras released him and drew out his watch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56006:“Collect yourself,” said he. “Think or pray. You have one minute.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:56009:“Mercy!” murmured the murderer; then he dropped his head and stammered
tests/les_miserables.txt:56010:a few inarticulate oaths.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56013:then he replaced his watch in his fob. That done, he grasped Le Cabuc
tests/les_miserables.txt:56014:by the hair, as the latter coiled himself into a ball at his knees and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56015:shrieked, and placed the muzzle of the pistol to his ear. Many of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:56019:An explosion was heard, the assassin fell to the pavement face
tests/les_miserables.txt:56022:Enjolras straightened himself up, and cast a convinced and severe
tests/les_miserables.txt:56023:glance around him. Then he spurned the corpse with his foot and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:56028:Three men raised the body of the unhappy wretch, which was still
tests/les_miserables.txt:56029:agitated by the last mechanical convulsions of the life that had fled,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56030:and flung it over the little barricade into the Rue Mondétour.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56033:slowly spread over his redoubtable serenity. All at once he raised his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56034:voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56036:A silence fell upon them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56040:because insurrection must have its discipline. Assassination is even
tests/les_miserables.txt:56041:more of a crime here than elsewhere; we are under the eyes of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56042:Revolution, we are the priests of the Republic, we are the victims of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56043:duty, and must not be possible to slander our combat. I have,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56044:therefore, tried that man, and condemned him to death. As for myself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56045:constrained as I am to do what I have done, and yet abhorring it, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:56047:condemned myself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:56052:“We will share thy fate,” cried Combeferre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56054:“So be it,” replied Enjolras. “One word more. In executing this man, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:56055:have obeyed necessity; but necessity is a monster of the old world,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56056:necessity’s name is Fatality. Now, the law of progress is, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:56058:vanish before Fraternity. It is a bad moment to pronounce the word
tests/les_miserables.txt:56059:love. No matter, I do pronounce it. And I glorify it. Love, the future
tests/les_miserables.txt:56062:ferocious ignorance, nor bloody retaliation. As there will be no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:56063:Satan, there will be no more Michael. In the future no one will kill
tests/les_miserables.txt:56064:any one else, the earth will beam with radiance, the human race will
tests/les_miserables.txt:56065:love. The day will come, citizens, when all will be concord, harmony,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56066:light, joy and life; it will come, and it is in order that it may come
tests/les_miserables.txt:56070:Enjolras ceased. His virgin lips closed; and he remained for some time
tests/les_miserables.txt:56072:staring eye caused those about him to speak in low tones.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56074:Jean Prouvaire and Combeferre pressed each other’s hands silently, and,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56075:leaning against each other in an angle of the barricade, they watched
tests/les_miserables.txt:56076:with an admiration in which there was some compassion, that grave young
tests/les_miserables.txt:56077:man, executioner and priest, composed of light, like crystal, and also
tests/les_miserables.txt:56078:of rock.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56080:Let us say at once that later on, after the action, when the bodies
tests/les_miserables.txt:56081:were taken to the morgue and searched, a police agent’s card was found
tests/les_miserables.txt:56082:on Le Cabuc. The author of this book had in his hands, in 1848, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56083:special report on this subject made to the Prefect of Police in 1832.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56085:We will add, that if we are to believe a tradition of the police, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:56086:is strange but probably well founded, Le Cabuc was Claquesous. The fact
tests/les_miserables.txt:56087:is, that dating from the death of Le Cabuc, there was no longer any
tests/les_miserables.txt:56088:question of Claquesous. Claquesous had nowhere left any trace of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56089:disappearance; he would seem to have amalgamated himself with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56092:The whole insurgent group was still under the influence of the emotion
tests/les_miserables.txt:56093:of that tragic case which had been so quickly tried and so quickly
tests/les_miserables.txt:56094:terminated, when Courfeyrac again beheld on the barricade, the small
tests/les_miserables.txt:56097:This lad, who had a bold and reckless air, had come by night to join
tests/les_miserables.txt:56111:The voice which had summoned Marius through the twilight to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56112:barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, had produced on him the effect
tests/les_miserables.txt:56113:of the voice of destiny. He wished to die; the opportunity presented
tests/les_miserables.txt:56114:itself; he knocked at the door of the tomb, a hand in the darkness
tests/les_miserables.txt:56115:offered him the key. These melancholy openings which take place in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56116:gloom before despair, are tempting. Marius thrust aside the bar which
tests/les_miserables.txt:56121:Mad with grief, no longer conscious of anything fixed or solid in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56122:brain, incapable of accepting anything thenceforth of fate after those
tests/les_miserables.txt:56123:two months passed in the intoxication of youth and love, overwhelmed at
tests/les_miserables.txt:56124:once by all the reveries of despair, he had but one desire remaining,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56127:He set out at rapid pace. He found himself most opportunely armed, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:56130:The young man of whom he thought that he had caught a glimpse, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:56135:Place Louis XV., and reached the Rue de Rivoli. The shops were open
tests/les_miserables.txt:56136:there, the gas was burning under the arcades, women were making their
tests/les_miserables.txt:56137:purchases in the stalls, people were eating ices in the Café Laiter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56138:and nibbling small cakes at the English pastry-cook’s shop. Only a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:56139:posting-chaises were setting out at a gallop from the Hôtel des Princes
tests/les_miserables.txt:56140:and the Hôtel Meurice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56143:the shops were closed, the merchants were chatting in front of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:56146:as usual. There was cavalry on the Place du Palais-Royal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56150:were fast shut, no one was chatting on the thresholds, the street grew
tests/les_miserables.txt:56151:sombre, and, at the same time, the crowd increased in density. For the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56152:passers-by now amounted to a crowd. No one could be seen to speak in
tests/les_miserables.txt:56155:Near the fountain of the Arbre-Sec, there were “assemblages”,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56156:motionless and gloomy groups which were to those who went and came as
tests/les_miserables.txt:56159:At the entrance to the Rue des Prouvaires, the crowd no longer walked.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56160:It formed a resisting, massive, solid, compact, almost impenetrable
tests/les_miserables.txt:56161:block of people who were huddled together, and conversing in low tones.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56162:There were hardly any black coats or round hats now, but smock frocks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56163:blouses, caps, and bristling and cadaverous heads. This multitude
tests/les_miserables.txt:56164:undulated confusedly in the nocturnal gloom. Its whisperings had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56165:hoarse accent of a vibration. Although not one of them was walking, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56169:in which a candle was burning. Only the solitary and diminishing rows
tests/les_miserables.txt:56170:of lanterns could be seen vanishing into the street in the distance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56172:and shed upon the pavement a shadow which had the form of a huge
tests/les_miserables.txt:56173:spider. These streets were not deserted. There could be descried piles
tests/les_miserables.txt:56174:of guns, moving bayonets, and troops bivouacking. No curious observer
tests/les_miserables.txt:56175:passed that limit. There circulation ceased. There the rabble ended and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56180:pass the bivouac of the troops, he shunned the patrols, he avoided the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56181:sentinels. He made a circuit, reached the Rue de Béthisy, and directed
tests/les_miserables.txt:56182:his course towards the Halles. At the corner of the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:56185:After having passed the zone of the crowd, he had passed the limits of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56188:no one; solitude, silence, night, I know not what chill which seized
tests/les_miserables.txt:56189:hold upon one. Entering a street was like entering a cellar.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56191:He continued to advance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56193:He took a few steps. Some one passed close to him at a run. Was it a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56194:man? Or a woman? Were there many of them? he could not have told. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:56197:Proceeding from circuit to circuit, he reached a lane which he judged
tests/les_miserables.txt:56198:to be the Rue de la Poterie; near the middle of this street, he came in
tests/les_miserables.txt:56199:contact with an obstacle. He extended his hands. It was an overturned
tests/les_miserables.txt:56200:wagon; his foot recognized pools of water, gullies, and paving-stones
tests/les_miserables.txt:56201:scattered and piled up. A barricade had been begun there and abandoned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56202:He climbed over the stones and found himself on the other side of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56204:the walls of the houses. A little beyond the barricade, it seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:56205:him that he could make out something white in front of him. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:56206:approached, it took on a form. It was two white horses; the horses of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56209:with the weary patience of brutes who no more understand the actions of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56210:men, than man understands the actions of Providence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56212:Marius left the horses behind him. As he was approaching a street which
tests/les_miserables.txt:56213:seemed to him to be the Rue du Contrat-Social, a shot coming no one
tests/les_miserables.txt:56214:knows whence, and traversing the darkness at random, whistled close by
tests/les_miserables.txt:56215:him, and the bullet pierced a brass shaving-dish suspended above his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56216:head over a hairdresser’s shop. This pierced shaving-dish was still to
tests/les_miserables.txt:56217:be seen in 1848, in the Rue du Contrat-Social, at the corner of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56220:This shot still betokened life. From that instant forth he encountered
tests/les_miserables.txt:56223:The whole of this itinerary resembled a descent of black steps.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56233:A being who could have hovered over Paris that night with the wing of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56234:the bat or the owl would have had beneath his eyes a gloomy spectacle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56236:All that old quarter of the Halles, which is like a city within a city,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56237:through which run the Rues Saint-Denis and Saint-Martin, where a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56238:thousand lanes cross, and of which the insurgents had made their
tests/les_miserables.txt:56240:and enormous cavity hollowed out in the centre of Paris. There the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56241:glance fell into an abyss. Thanks to the broken lanterns, thanks to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56242:closed windows, there all radiance, all life, all sound, all movement
tests/les_miserables.txt:56243:ceased. The invisible police of the insurrection were on the watch
tests/les_miserables.txt:56244:everywhere, and maintained order, that is to say, night. The necessary
tests/les_miserables.txt:56245:tactics of insurrection are to drown small numbers in a vast obscurity,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56246:to multiply every combatant by the possibilities which that obscurity
tests/les_miserables.txt:56247:contains. At dusk, every window where a candle was burning received a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56249:Hence nothing was stirring. There was nothing but fright, mourning,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56250:stupor in the houses; and in the streets, a sort of sacred horror. Not
tests/les_miserables.txt:56252:chimneys, and the roofs, and the vague reflections which are cast back
tests/les_miserables.txt:56253:by the wet and muddy pavements, were visible. An eye cast upward at
tests/les_miserables.txt:56254:that mass of shadows might, perhaps, have caught a glimpse here and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56255:there, at intervals, of indistinct gleams which brought out broken and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56256:eccentric lines, and profiles of singular buildings, something like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56257:lights which go and come in ruins; it was at such points that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56258:barricades were situated. The rest was a lake of obscurity, foggy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56259:heavy, and funereal, above which, in motionless and melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:56260:outlines, rose the tower of Saint-Jacques, the church of Saint-Merry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56261:and two or three more of those grand edifices of which man makes giants
tests/les_miserables.txt:56265:where the Parisian circulation had not been annihilated, and where a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56267:distinguished the metallic gleam of swords and bayonets, the dull
tests/les_miserables.txt:56269:were swelling from minute to minute; a formidable girdle which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:56270:slowly drawing in and around the insurrection.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56273:cavern; everything there appeared to be asleep or motionless, and, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:56274:we have just seen, any street which one might come to offered nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:56277:A wild darkness, full of traps, full of unseen and formidable shocks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56278:into which it was alarming to penetrate, and in which it was terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:56280:awaited, where those who waited shuddered before those who were coming.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56281:Invisible combatants were entrenched at every corner of the street;
tests/les_miserables.txt:56282:snares of the sepulchre concealed in the density of night. All was
tests/les_miserables.txt:56283:over. No more light was to be hoped for, henceforth, except the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56284:lightning of guns, no further encounter except the abrupt and rapid
tests/les_miserables.txt:56285:apparition of death. Where? How? When? No one knew, but it was certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:56286:and inevitable. In this place which had been marked out for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56287:struggle, the Government and the insurrection, the National Guard, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56288:popular societies, the bourgeois and the uprising, groping their way,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56289:were about to come into contact. The necessity was the same for both.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56290:The only possible issue thenceforth was to emerge thence killed or
tests/les_miserables.txt:56291:conquerors. A situation so extreme, an obscurity so powerful, that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56296:equal. For the one party, to advance meant death, and no one dreamed of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56301:that triumph should rest either here or there, that the insurrection
tests/les_miserables.txt:56303:understood this as well as the parties; the most insignificant
tests/les_miserables.txt:56304:bourgeois felt it. Hence a thought of anguish which mingled with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56306:decided; hence a redoubled anxiety around that silence whence a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56307:catastrophe was on the point of emerging. Here only one sound was
tests/les_miserables.txt:56308:audible, a sound as heart-rending as the death rattle, as menacing as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56309:malediction, the tocsin of Saint-Merry. Nothing could be more
tests/les_miserables.txt:56310:blood-curdling than the clamor of that wild and desperate bell, wailing
tests/les_miserables.txt:56313:As it often happens, nature seemed to have fallen into accord with what
tests/les_miserables.txt:56315:effect. The stars had disappeared, heavy clouds filled the horizon with
tests/les_miserables.txt:56316:their melancholy folds. A black sky rested on these dead streets, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:56320:While a battle that was still wholly political was in preparation in
tests/les_miserables.txt:56321:the same locality which had already witnessed so many revolutionary
tests/les_miserables.txt:56322:events, while youth, the secret associations, the schools, in the name
tests/les_miserables.txt:56323:of principles, and the middle classes, in the name of interests, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:56324:approaching preparatory to dashing themselves together, clasping and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56325:throwing each other, while each one hastened and invited the last and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56326:decisive hour of the crisis, far away and quite outside of this fatal
tests/les_miserables.txt:56327:quarter, in the most profound depths of the unfathomable cavities of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56328:that wretched old Paris which disappears under the splendor of happy
tests/les_miserables.txt:56329:and opulent Paris, the sombre voice of the people could be heard giving
tests/les_miserables.txt:56330:utterance to a dull roar.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56332:A fearful and sacred voice which is composed of the roar of the brute
tests/les_miserables.txt:56333:and of the word of God, which terrifies the weak and which warns the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56334:wise, which comes both from below like the voice of the lion, and from
tests/les_miserables.txt:56335:on high like the voice of the thunder.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56343:Marius had reached the Halles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56345:There everything was still calmer, more obscure and more motionless
tests/les_miserables.txt:56346:than in the neighboring streets. One would have said that the glacial
tests/les_miserables.txt:56347:peace of the sepulchre had sprung forth from the earth and had spread
tests/les_miserables.txt:56350:Nevertheless, a red glow brought out against this black background the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56351:lofty roofs of the houses which barred the Rue de la Chanvrerie on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56352:Saint-Eustache side. It was the reflection of the torch which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:56353:burning in the Corinthe barricade. Marius directed his steps towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:56354:that red light. It had drawn him to the Marché-aux-Poirées, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:56355:caught a glimpse of the dark mouth of the Rue des Prêcheurs. He entered
tests/les_miserables.txt:56357:see him. He felt that he was very close to that which he had come in
tests/les_miserables.txt:56358:search of, and he walked on tiptoe. In this manner he reached the elbow
tests/les_miserables.txt:56359:of that short section of the Rue Mondétour which was, as the reader
tests/les_miserables.txt:56360:will remember, the only communication which Enjolras had preserved with
tests/les_miserables.txt:56361:the outside world. At the corner of the last house, on his left, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:56366:which cast a broad curtain of shadow, in which he was himself engulfed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56367:he perceived some light on the pavement, a bit of the wine-shop, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56368:beyond, a flickering lamp within a sort of shapeless wall, and men
tests/les_miserables.txt:56369:crouching down with guns on their knees. All this was ten fathoms
tests/les_miserables.txt:56370:distant from him. It was the interior of the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56372:The houses which bordered the lane on the right concealed the rest of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56373:the wine-shop, the large barricade, and the flag from him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56380:He thought of that heroic Colonel Pontmercy, who had been so proud a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56381:soldier, who had guarded the frontier of France under the Republic, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56382:had touched the frontier of Asia under Napoleon, who had beheld Genoa,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56383:Alexandria, Milan, Turin, Madrid, Vienna, Dresden, Berlin, Moscow, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:56384:had left on all the victorious battle-fields of Europe drops of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:56385:same blood, which he, Marius, had in his veins, who had grown gray
tests/les_miserables.txt:56386:before his time in discipline and command, who had lived with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56387:sword-belt buckled, his epaulets falling on his breast, his cockade
tests/les_miserables.txt:56388:blackened with powder, his brow furrowed with his helmet, in barracks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56389:in camp, in the bivouac, in ambulances, and who, at the expiration of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56390:twenty years, had returned from the great wars with a scarred cheek, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56391:smiling countenance, tranquil, admirable, pure as a child, having done
tests/les_miserables.txt:56392:everything for France and nothing against her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56394:He said to himself that his day had also come now, that his hour had
tests/les_miserables.txt:56395:struck, that following his father, he too was about to show himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:56398:he was about to wage war in his turn and descend to the field of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56399:battle, and that the field of battle upon which he was to descend was
tests/les_miserables.txt:56400:the street, and that the war in which he was about to engage was civil
tests/les_miserables.txt:56403:He beheld civil war laid open like a gulf before him, and into this he
tests/les_miserables.txt:56406:He thought of his father’s sword, which his grandfather had sold to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56407:second-hand dealer, and which he had so mournfully regretted. He said
tests/les_miserables.txt:56408:to himself that that chaste and valiant sword had done well to escape
tests/les_miserables.txt:56410:fled, it was because it was intelligent and because it had foreseen the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56413:cellar-windows, blows given and received in the rear; it was because,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56414:coming from Marengo and Friedland, it did not wish to go to the Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:56415:la Chanvrerie; it was because, after what it had done with the father,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56418:pillow, he had dared to take it and carry it off for this combat of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56419:darkness between Frenchmen in the streets, it would assuredly have
tests/les_miserables.txt:56420:scorched his hands and burst out aflame before his eyes, like the sword
tests/les_miserables.txt:56424:glory, and that it was far better that the colonel’s sword should be
tests/les_miserables.txt:56425:sold at auction, sold to the old-clothes man, thrown among the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:56426:junk, than that it should, to-day, wound the side of his country.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56430:This was horrible. But what was he to do? Live without Cosette he could
tests/les_miserables.txt:56431:not. Since she was gone, he must needs die. Had he not given her his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56433:that it pleased her that Marius should die. And then, it was clear that
tests/les_miserables.txt:56434:she no longer loved him, since she had departed thus without warning,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56438:having approached it? should he slip away after having come and peeped
tests/les_miserables.txt:56439:into the barricade? slip away, all in a tremble, saying: “After all, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:56440:have had enough of it as it is. I have seen it, that suffices, this is
tests/les_miserables.txt:56441:civil war, and I shall take my leave!” Should he abandon his friends
tests/les_miserables.txt:56442:who were expecting him? Who were in need of him possibly! who were a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56443:mere handful against an army! Should he be untrue at once to his love,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56444:to country, to his word? Should he give to his cowardice the pretext of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56447:the loins with the flat of his sword, and shout to him: “March on, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:56451:Thus a prey to the conflicting movements of his thoughts, he dropped
tests/les_miserables.txt:56454:All at once he raised it. A sort of splendid rectification had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:56455:been effected in his mind. There is a widening of the sphere of thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:56456:which is peculiar to the vicinity of the grave; it makes one see
tests/les_miserables.txt:56457:clearly to be near death. The vision of the action into which he felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:56462:reverie recurred to him in throngs, but without troubling him. He left
tests/les_miserables.txt:56465:Let us see, why should his father be indignant? Are there not cases
tests/les_miserables.txt:56466:where insurrection rises to the dignity of duty? What was there that
tests/les_miserables.txt:56467:was degrading for the son of Colonel Pontmercy in the combat which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:56469:something quite different. The question is no longer one of sacred
tests/les_miserables.txt:56470:territory,—but of a holy idea. The country wails, that may be, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:56471:humanity applauds. But is it true that the country does wail? France
tests/les_miserables.txt:56472:bleeds, but liberty smiles; and in the presence of liberty’s smile,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56473:France forgets her wound. And then if we look at things from a still
tests/les_miserables.txt:56474:more lofty point of view, why do we speak of civil war?
tests/les_miserables.txt:56477:between men, war between brothers? War is qualified only by its object.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56478:There is no such thing as foreign or civil war; there is only just and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56479:unjust war. Until that day when the grand human agreement is concluded,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56480:war, that at least which is the effort of the future, which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:56481:hastening on against the past, which is lagging in the rear, may be
tests/les_miserables.txt:56482:necessary. What have we to reproach that war with? War does not become
tests/les_miserables.txt:56483:a disgrace, the sword does not become a disgrace, except when it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:56484:used for assassinating the right, progress, reason, civilization,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56485:truth. Then war, whether foreign or civil, is iniquitous; it is called
tests/les_miserables.txt:56486:crime. Outside the pale of that holy thing, justice, by what right does
tests/les_miserables.txt:56489:stranger, Timoleon against the tyrant, which is the greater? the one is
tests/les_miserables.txt:56491:arms within a city’s limits without taking the object into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56492:consideration? Then note the infamy of Brutus, Marcel, Arnould von
tests/les_miserables.txt:56495:Ambiorix fought against Rome, Artevelde against France, Marnix against
tests/les_miserables.txt:56497:monarchy is a foreigner; oppression is a stranger; the right divine is
tests/les_miserables.txt:56499:the geographical frontier. Driving out the tyrant or driving out the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56500:English, in both cases, regaining possession of one’s own territory.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56501:There comes an hour when protestation no longer suffices; after
tests/les_miserables.txt:56502:philosophy, action is required; live force finishes what the idea has
tests/les_miserables.txt:56503:sketched out; Prometheus chained begins, Arostogeiton ends; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56504:encyclopedia enlightens souls, the 10th of August electrifies them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56505:After Æschylus, Thrasybulus; after Diderot, Danton. Multitudes have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56506:tendency to accept the master. Their mass bears witness to apathy. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:56507:crowd is easily led as a whole to obedience. Men must be stirred up,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56508:pushed on, treated roughly by the very benefit of their deliverance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56510:terrible handfuls. They must be a little thunderstruck themselves at
tests/les_miserables.txt:56511:their own well-being; this dazzling awakens them. Hence the necessity
tests/les_miserables.txt:56512:of tocsins and wars. Great combatants must rise, must enlighten nations
tests/les_miserables.txt:56513:with audacity, and shake up that sad humanity which is covered with
tests/les_miserables.txt:56514:gloom by the right divine, Cæsarian glory, force, fanaticism,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56515:irresponsible power, and absolute majesty; a rabble stupidly occupied
tests/les_miserables.txt:56516:in the contemplation, in their twilight splendor, of these sombre
tests/les_miserables.txt:56518:Do you call Louis Philippe the tyrant? No; no more than Louis XVI. Both
tests/les_miserables.txt:56519:of them are what history is in the habit of calling good kings; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:56520:principles are not to be parcelled out, the logic of the true is
tests/les_miserables.txt:56521:rectilinear, the peculiarity of truth is that it lacks complaisance; no
tests/les_miserables.txt:56522:concessions, then; all encroachments on man should be repressed. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:56523:is a divine right in Louis XVI., there is _because a Bourbon_ in Louis
tests/les_miserables.txt:56524:Philippe; both represent in a certain measure the confiscation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56525:right, and, in order to clear away universal insurrection, they must be
tests/les_miserables.txt:56526:combated; it must be done, France being always the one to begin. When
tests/les_miserables.txt:56527:the master falls in France, he falls everywhere. In short, what cause
tests/les_miserables.txt:56528:is more just, and consequently, what war is greater, than that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:56529:re-establishes social truth, restores her throne to liberty, restores
tests/les_miserables.txt:56530:the people to the people, restores sovereignty to man, replaces the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56531:purple on the head of France, restores equity and reason in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:56532:plenitude, suppresses every germ of antagonism by restoring each one to
tests/les_miserables.txt:56533:himself, annihilates the obstacle which royalty presents to the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:56534:immense universal concord, and places the human race once more on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56535:level with the right? These wars build up peace. An enormous fortress
tests/les_miserables.txt:56536:of prejudices, privileges, superstitions, lies, exactions, abuses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56537:violences, iniquities, and darkness still stands erect in this world,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56538:with its towers of hatred. It must be cast down. This monstrous mass
tests/les_miserables.txt:56539:must be made to crumble. To conquer at Austerlitz is grand; to take the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56542:There is no one who has not noticed it in his own case—the soul,—and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56543:therein lies the marvel of its unity complicated with ubiquity, has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56544:strange aptitude for reasoning almost coldly in the most violent
tests/les_miserables.txt:56546:despair in the very agony of their blackest monologues, treat subjects
tests/les_miserables.txt:56547:and discuss theses. Logic is mingled with convulsion, and the thread of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56551:As he meditated thus, dejected but resolute, hesitating in every
tests/les_miserables.txt:56552:direction, and, in short, shuddering at what he was about to do, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56553:glance strayed to the interior of the barricade. The insurgents were
tests/les_miserables.txt:56554:here conversing in a low voice, without moving, and there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:56555:perceptible that quasi-silence which marks the last stage of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56556:expectation. Overhead, at the small window in the third story Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:56557:descried a sort of spectator who appeared to him to be singularly
tests/les_miserables.txt:56558:attentive. This was the porter who had been killed by Le Cabuc. Below,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56559:by the lights of the torch, which was thrust between the paving-stones,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56560:this head could be vaguely distinguished. Nothing could be stranger, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:56561:that sombre and uncertain gleam, than that livid, motionless,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56562:astonished face, with its bristling hair, its eyes fixed and staring,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56564:curiosity. One would have said that the man who was dead was surveying
tests/les_miserables.txt:56565:those who were about to die. A long trail of blood which had flowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:56566:from that head, descended in reddish threads from the window to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56585:As yet, nothing had come. Ten o’clock had sounded from Saint-Merry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56586:Enjolras and Combeferre had gone and seated themselves, carbines in
tests/les_miserables.txt:56587:hand, near the outlet of the grand barricade. They no longer addressed
tests/les_miserables.txt:56588:each other, they listened, seeking to catch even the faintest and most
tests/les_miserables.txt:56589:distant sound of marching.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56591:Suddenly, in the midst of the dismal calm, a clear, gay, young voice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56592:which seemed to come from the Rue Saint-Denis, rose and began to sing
tests/les_miserables.txt:56593:distinctly, to the old popular air of “By the Light of the Moon,” this
tests/les_miserables.txt:56594:bit of poetry, terminated by a cry like the crow of a cock:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:56600:En capote bleue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56602:Voici la banlieue!
tests/les_miserables.txt:56603:Co-cocorico!54
tests/les_miserables.txt:56606:They pressed each other’s hands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56608:“That is Gavroche,” said Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56613:agile than a clown climb over the omnibus, and Gavroche bounded into
tests/les_miserables.txt:56614:the barricade, all breathless, saying:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:56619:An electric quiver shot through the whole barricade, and the sound of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56620:hands seeking their guns became audible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56622:“Would you like my carbine?” said Enjolras to the lad.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56624:“I want a big gun,” replied Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56628:Two sentinels had fallen back, and had come in almost at the same
tests/les_miserables.txt:56629:moment as Gavroche. They were the sentinels from the end of the street,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56631:Lane des Prêcheurs had remained at his post, which indicated that
tests/les_miserables.txt:56632:nothing was approaching from the direction of the bridges and Halles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56634:The Rue de la Chanvrerie, of which a few paving-stones alone were dimly
tests/les_miserables.txt:56635:visible in the reflection of the light projected on the flag, offered
tests/les_miserables.txt:56636:to the insurgents the aspect of a vast black door vaguely opened into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56639:Each man had taken up his position for the conflict.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56642:Courfeyrac, Bossuet, Joly, Bahorel, and Gavroche, were kneeling inside
tests/les_miserables.txt:56643:the large barricade, with their heads on a level with the crest of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56644:barrier, the barrels of their guns and carbines aimed on the stones as
tests/les_miserables.txt:56645:though at loop-holes, attentive, mute, ready to fire. Six, commanded by
tests/les_miserables.txt:56650:heavy, and numerous, became distinctly audible in the direction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56651:Saint-Leu. This sound, faint at first, then precise, then heavy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56652:sonorous, approached slowly, without halt, without intermission, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56653:tranquil and terrible continuity. Nothing was to be heard but this. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:56654:was that combined silence and sound, of the statue of the commander,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56655:but this stony step had something indescribably enormous and multiple
tests/les_miserables.txt:56656:about it which awakened the idea of a throng, and, at the same time,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56657:the idea of a spectre. One thought one heard the terrible statue Legion
tests/les_miserables.txt:56658:marching onward. This tread drew near; it drew still nearer, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56659:stopped. It seemed as though the breathing of many men could be heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:56661:bottom of that dense obscurity there could be distinguished a multitude
tests/les_miserables.txt:56662:of metallic threads, as fine as needles and almost imperceptible, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:56663:moved about like those indescribable phosphoric networks which one sees
tests/les_miserables.txt:56664:beneath one’s closed eyelids, in the first mists of slumber at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56666:gun-barrels confusedly illuminated by the distant reflection of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56667:torch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56669:A pause ensued, as though both sides were waiting. All at once, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:56670:the depths of this darkness, a voice, which was all the more sinister,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56671:since no one was visible, and which appeared to be the gloom itself
tests/les_miserables.txt:56677:At the same time, the click of guns, as they were lowered into
tests/les_miserables.txt:56682:“The French Revolution!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:56685:“Fire!” shouted the voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56688:furnace had been flung open, and hastily closed again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56690:A fearful detonation burst forth on the barricade. The red flag fell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56691:The discharge had been so violent and so dense that it had cut the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56694:Bullets which had rebounded from the cornices of the houses penetrated
tests/les_miserables.txt:56695:the barricade and wounded several men.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56697:The impression produced by this first discharge was freezing. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:56698:attack had been rough, and of a nature to inspire reflection in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56702:“Comrades!” shouted Courfeyrac, “let us not waste our powder. Let us
tests/les_miserables.txt:56709:He picked up the flag, which had fallen precisely at his feet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56711:Outside, the clatter of the ramrods in the guns could be heard; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56717:barricade again?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:56720:Not a man responded. To mount on the barricade at the very moment when,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56721:without any doubt, it was again the object of their aim, was simply
tests/les_miserables.txt:56722:death. The bravest hesitated to pronounce his own condemnation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56734:Since they had arrived at Corinthe, and had begun the construction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56735:the barricade, no attention had been paid to Father Mabeuf. M. Mabeuf
tests/les_miserables.txt:56737:the wine-shop and had seated himself behind the counter. There he had,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56739:think. Courfeyrac and others had accosted him two or three times,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56740:warning him of his peril, beseeching him to withdraw, but he did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:56743:his lips became motionless and his eyes no longer had the appearance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56746:Several hours before the barricade was attacked, he had assumed an
tests/les_miserables.txt:56747:attitude which he did not afterwards abandon, with both fists planted
tests/les_miserables.txt:56749:a precipice. Nothing had been able to move him from this attitude; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:56750:did not seem as though his mind were in the barricade. When each had
tests/les_miserables.txt:56751:gone to take up his position for the combat, there remained in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56753:with a naked sword, watching over Javert, and himself, Mabeuf. At the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56754:moment of the attack, at the detonation, the physical shock had reached
tests/les_miserables.txt:56755:him and had, as it were, awakened him; he started up abruptly, crossed
tests/les_miserables.txt:56757:no one volunteer?” the old man was seen to make his appearance on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56758:threshold of the wine-shop. His presence produced a sort of commotion
tests/les_miserables.txt:56768:him with a religious fear; he tore the flag from Enjolras, who recoiled
tests/les_miserables.txt:56769:in amazement and then, since no one dared to stop or to assist him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56771:to ascend the staircase of paving-stones arranged in the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56772:This was so melancholy and so grand that all around him cried: “Off
tests/les_miserables.txt:56774:spectacle; his white locks, his decrepit face, his lofty, bald, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56777:light of the torch, and the bystanders thought that they beheld the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56778:spectre of ’93 emerging from the earth, with the flag of terror in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56781:When he had reached the last step, when this trembling and terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:56782:phantom, erect on that pile of rubbish in the presence of twelve
tests/les_miserables.txt:56783:hundred invisible guns, drew himself up in the face of death and as
tests/les_miserables.txt:56784:though he were more powerful than it, the whole barricade assumed amid
tests/les_miserables.txt:56785:the darkness, a supernatural and colossal form.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56787:There ensued one of those silences which occur only in the presence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56788:prodigies. In the midst of this silence, the old man waved the red flag
tests/les_miserables.txt:56791:“Long live the Revolution! Long live the Republic! Fraternity!
tests/les_miserables.txt:56795:Those in the barricade heard a low and rapid whisper, like the murmur
tests/les_miserables.txt:56796:of a priest who is despatching a prayer in haste. It was probably the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56797:commissary of police who was making the legal summons at the other end
tests/les_miserables.txt:56800:Then the same piercing voice which had shouted: “Who goes there?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:56809:“Long live the Republic!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:56812:“Fire!” said the voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56814:A second discharge, similar to the first, rained down upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56815:barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56818:fell backwards on the pavement, like a log, at full length, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:56819:outstretched arms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56824:One of those emotions which are superior to man, which make him forget
tests/les_miserables.txt:56825:even to defend himself, seized upon the insurgents, and they approached
tests/les_miserables.txt:56826:the body with respectful awe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56828:“What men these regicides were!” said Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56830:Courfeyrac bent down to Enjolras’ ear:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:56833:But this man was anything rather than a regicide. I knew him. His name
tests/les_miserables.txt:56835:But he was a brave blockhead. Just look at his head.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:56838:“The head of a blockhead and the heart of a Brutus,” replied Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56840:Then he raised his voice:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:56842:“Citizens! This is the example which the old give to the young. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:56843:hesitated, he came! We were drawing back, he advanced! This is what
tests/les_miserables.txt:56844:those who are trembling with age teach to those who tremble with fear!
tests/les_miserables.txt:56845:This aged man is august in the eyes of his country. He has had a long
tests/les_miserables.txt:56846:life and a magnificent death! Now, let us place the body under cover,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56847:that each one of us may defend this old man dead as he would his father
tests/les_miserables.txt:56848:living, and may his presence in our midst render the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:56852:A murmur of gloomy and energetic assent followed these words.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56854:Enjolras bent down, raised the old man’s head, and fierce as he was, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:56856:dead man with tender precaution, as though he feared to hurt it, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:56857:removed his coat, showed the bloody holes in it to all, and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:56868:They threw a long black shawl of Widow Hucheloup’s over Father Mabeuf.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56873:These men, wholly absorbed in the grave and sacred task in which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:56874:were engaged, thought no more of the perilous situation in which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:56877:When the corpse passed near Javert, who was still impassive, Enjolras
tests/les_miserables.txt:56883:During all this time, Little Gavroche, who alone had not quitted his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56885:approaching the barricade. All at once he shouted:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:56890:Courfeyrac, Enjolras, Jean Prouvaire, Combeferre, Joly, Bahorel,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56893:above the barricade. Municipal guards of lofty stature were making
tests/les_miserables.txt:56894:their way in, some striding over the omnibus, others through the cut,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56895:thrusting before them the urchin, who retreated, but did not flee.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56897:The moment was critical. It was that first, redoubtable moment of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56899:the water begins to filter through the fissures of dike. A second more
tests/les_miserables.txt:56900:and the barricade would have been taken.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56902:Bahorel dashed upon the first municipal guard who was entering, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56903:killed him on the spot with a blow from his gun; the second killed
tests/les_miserables.txt:56905:Courfeyrac, who was shouting: “Follow me!” The largest of all, a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:56906:of colossus, marched on Gavroche with his bayonet fixed. The urchin
tests/les_miserables.txt:56908:giant, and fired. No discharge followed. Javert’s gun was not loaded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56909:The municipal guard burst into a laugh and raised his bayonet at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56910:child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56912:Before the bayonet had touched Gavroche, the gun slipped from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56913:soldier’s grasp, a bullet had struck the municipal guardsman in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56914:centre of the forehead, and he fell over on his back. A second bullet
tests/les_miserables.txt:56915:struck the other guard, who had assaulted Courfeyrac in the breast, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56918:This was the work of Marius, who had just entered the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56926:Marius, still concealed in the turn of the Rue Mondétour, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:56927:witnessed, shuddering and irresolute, the first phase of the combat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56929:vertigo which may be designated as the call of the abyss. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56930:presence of the imminence of the peril, in the presence of the death of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56931:M. Mabeuf, that melancholy enigma, in the presence of Bahorel killed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56932:and Courfeyrac shouting: “Follow me!” of that child threatened, of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56933:friends to succor or to avenge, all hesitation had vanished, and he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:56934:flung himself into the conflict, his two pistols in hand. With his
tests/les_miserables.txt:56935:first shot he had saved Gavroche, and with the second delivered
tests/les_miserables.txt:56936:Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56938:Amid the sound of the shots, amid the cries of the assaulted guards,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56939:the assailants had climbed the entrenchment, on whose summit Municipal
tests/les_miserables.txt:56940:Guards, soldiers of the line and National Guards from the suburbs could
tests/les_miserables.txt:56944:They already covered more than two-thirds of the barrier, but they did
tests/les_miserables.txt:56945:not leap into the enclosure, as though wavering in the fear of some
tests/les_miserables.txt:56946:trap. They gazed into the dark barricade as one would gaze into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56947:lion’s den. The light of the torch illuminated only their bayonets,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56948:their bear-skin caps, and the upper part of their uneasy and angry
tests/les_miserables.txt:56949:faces.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56951:Marius had no longer any weapons; he had flung away his discharged
tests/les_miserables.txt:56952:pistols after firing them; but he had caught sight of the barrel of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56955:As he turned half round, gazing in that direction, a soldier took aim
tests/les_miserables.txt:56957:laid on the muzzle of the gun and obstructed it. This was done by some
tests/les_miserables.txt:56959:shot sped, traversed the hand and possibly, also, the workman, since he
tests/les_miserables.txt:56960:fell, but the ball did not strike Marius. All this, which was rather to
tests/les_miserables.txt:56962:the tap-room, hardly noticed. Still, he had, in a confused way,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56963:perceived that gun-barrel aimed at him, and the hand which had blocked
tests/les_miserables.txt:56964:it, and he had heard the discharge. But in moments like this, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56965:things which one sees vacillate and are precipitated, and one pauses
tests/les_miserables.txt:56966:for nothing. One feels obscurely impelled towards more darkness still,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56967:and all is cloud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56970:shouted: “Wait! Don’t fire at random!” In the first confusion, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:56971:might, in fact, wound each other. The majority of them had ascended to
tests/les_miserables.txt:56972:the window on the first story and to the attic windows, whence they
tests/les_miserables.txt:56973:commanded the assailants.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56975:The most determined, with Enjolras, Courfeyrac, Jean Prouvaire, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56976:Combeferre, had proudly placed themselves with their backs against the
tests/les_miserables.txt:56977:houses at the rear, unsheltered and facing the ranks of soldiers and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56978:guards who crowned the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56980:All this was accomplished without haste, with that strange and
tests/les_miserables.txt:56981:threatening gravity which precedes engagements. They took aim, point
tests/les_miserables.txt:56982:blank, on both sides: they were so close that they could talk together
tests/les_miserables.txt:56983:without raising their voices.
tests/les_miserables.txt:56985:When they had reached this point where the spark is on the brink of
tests/les_miserables.txt:56986:darting forth, an officer in a gorget extended his sword and said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:56993:The two discharges took place at the same moment, and all disappeared
tests/les_miserables.txt:56996:An acrid and stifling smoke in which dying and wounded lay with weak,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56997:dull groans. When the smoke cleared away, the combatants on both sides
tests/les_miserables.txt:56998:could be seen to be thinned out, but still in the same positions,
tests/les_miserables.txt:56999:reloading in silence. All at once, a thundering voice was heard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57002:“Be off with you, or I’ll blow up the barricade!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57005:All turned in the direction whence the voice proceeded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57008:then he had taken advantage of the smoke, and the sort of obscure mist
tests/les_miserables.txt:57009:which filled the entrenched enclosure, to glide along the barricade as
tests/les_miserables.txt:57010:far as that cage of paving-stones where the torch was fixed. To tear it
tests/les_miserables.txt:57011:from the torch, to replace it by the barrel of powder, to thrust the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57012:pile of stones under the barrel, which was instantly staved in, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57013:sort of horrible obedience,—all this had cost Marius but the time
tests/les_miserables.txt:57014:necessary to stoop and rise again; and now all, National Guards,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57015:Municipal Guards, officers, soldiers, huddled at the other extremity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57016:the barricade, gazed stupidly at him, as he stood with his foot on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57017:stones, his torch in his hand, his haughty face illuminated by a fatal
tests/les_miserables.txt:57018:resolution, drooping the flame of the torch towards that redoubtable
tests/les_miserables.txt:57019:pile where they could make out the broken barrel of powder, and giving
tests/les_miserables.txt:57020:vent to that startling cry:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57022:“Be off with you, or I’ll blow up the barricade!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57025:Marius on that barricade after the octogenarian was the vision of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57028:“Blow up the barricade!” said a sergeant, “and yourself with it!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57034:And he dropped the torch towards the barrel of powder.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57037:abandoning their dead and wounded, flowed back pell-mell and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57041:The barricade was free.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57049:All flocked around Marius. Courfeyrac flung himself on his neck.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57054:“What luck!” said Combeferre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57056:“You came in opportunely!” ejaculated Bossuet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57058:“If it had not been for you, I should have been dead!” began Courfeyrac
tests/les_miserables.txt:57062:Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57066:“Where is the chief?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57071:Marius had had a furnace in his brain all day long; now it was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57072:whirlwind. This whirlwind which was within him, produced on him the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57073:effect of being outside of him and of bearing him away. It seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:57074:him that he was already at an immense distance from life. His two
tests/les_miserables.txt:57076:precipice, Cosette lost to him, that barricade, M. Mabeuf getting
tests/les_miserables.txt:57077:himself killed for the Republic, himself the leader of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57079:nightmare. He was obliged to make a mental effort to recall the fact
tests/les_miserables.txt:57080:that all that surrounded him was real. Marius had already seen too much
tests/les_miserables.txt:57082:and that what it is always necessary to foresee is the unforeseen. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:57083:had looked on at his own drama as a piece which one does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:57086:In the mists which enveloped his thoughts, he did not recognize Javert,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57087:who, bound to his post, had not so much as moved his head during the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57088:whole of the attack on the barricade, and who had gazed on the revolt
tests/les_miserables.txt:57092:In the meanwhile, the assailants did not stir, they could be heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:57093:marching and swarming through at the end of the street but they did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:57094:venture into it, either because they were awaiting orders or because
tests/les_miserables.txt:57095:they were awaiting reinforcements before hurling themselves afresh on
tests/les_miserables.txt:57097:of them, who were medical students, set about caring for the wounded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57099:They had thrown the tables out of the wine-shop, with the exception of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57100:the two tables reserved for lint and cartridges, and of the one on
tests/les_miserables.txt:57101:which lay Father Mabeuf; they had added them to the barricade, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:57102:replaced them in the tap-room with mattresses from the bed of the widow
tests/les_miserables.txt:57103:Hucheloup and her servants. On these mattresses they had laid the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57104:wounded. As for the three poor creatures who inhabited Corinthe, no one
tests/les_miserables.txt:57105:knew what had become of them. They were finally found, however, hidden
tests/les_miserables.txt:57106:in the cellar.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57108:A poignant emotion clouded the joy of the disencumbered barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57110:The roll was called. One of the insurgents was missing. And who was it?
tests/les_miserables.txt:57124:This took place in the tap-room near Javert’s post.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57126:“Well,” resumed Combeferre, “I am going to fasten my handkerchief to my
tests/les_miserables.txt:57127:cane, and go as a flag of truce, to offer to exchange our man for
tests/les_miserables.txt:57133:At the end of the street there was a significant clash of arms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57135:They heard a manly voice shout:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57137:“Vive la France! Long live France! Long live the future!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57140:They recognized the voice of Prouvaire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57144:Silence fell again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57146:“They have killed him,” exclaimed Combeferre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57148:Enjolras glanced at Javert, and said to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57159:A peculiarity of this species of war is, that the attack of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57160:barricades is almost always made from the front, and that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57161:assailants generally abstain from turning the position, either because
tests/les_miserables.txt:57162:they fear ambushes, or because they are afraid of getting entangled in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57164:directed, therefore, to the grand barricade, which was, evidently, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57165:spot always menaced, and there the struggle would infallibly
tests/les_miserables.txt:57166:recommence. But Marius thought of the little barricade, and went
tests/les_miserables.txt:57167:thither. It was deserted and guarded only by the fire-pot which
tests/les_miserables.txt:57169:the branches of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie and the Rue du Cygne
tests/les_miserables.txt:57170:were profoundly calm.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57172:As Marius was withdrawing, after concluding his inspection, he heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:57173:his name pronounced feebly in the darkness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57178:He started, for he recognized the voice which had called to him two
tests/les_miserables.txt:57181:Only, the voice now seemed to be nothing more than a breath.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57186:his mind to the extraordinary realities which were clashing around him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57187:He advanced a step, in order to quit the distant recess where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57188:barricade lay.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57190:“Monsieur Marius!” repeated the voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57192:This time he could not doubt that he had heard it distinctly; he looked
tests/les_miserables.txt:57195:“At your feet,” said the voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57197:He bent down, and saw in the darkness a form which was dragging itself
tests/les_miserables.txt:57200:It was crawling along the pavement. It was this that had spoken to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57203:coarse velvet, bare feet, and something which resembled a pool of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57204:blood. Marius indistinctly made out a pale head which was lifted
tests/les_miserables.txt:57205:towards him and which was saying to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57207:“You do not recognize me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57216:Marius bent hastily down. It was, in fact, that unhappy child. She was
tests/les_miserables.txt:57217:dressed in men’s clothes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57219:“How come you here? What are you doing here?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57224:There are words and incidents which arouse dejected beings. Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:57225:cried out with a start:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57227:“You are wounded! Wait, I will carry you into the room! They will
tests/les_miserables.txt:57230:you come hither?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57235:She uttered a feeble cry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57242:“But I only touched your hand.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57246:saw a black hole.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57250:“It is pierced.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57253:“Pierced?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57279:“What madness! Poor child! But so much the better, if that is all, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:57280:is nothing, let me carry you to a bed. They will dress your wound; one
tests/les_miserables.txt:57281:does not die of a pierced hand.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57286:“The bullet traversed my hand, but it came out through my back. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:57287:useless to remove me from this spot. I will tell you how you can care
tests/les_miserables.txt:57294:“Oh! How good this is! How comfortable this is! There; I no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:57298:She remained silent for a moment, then she turned her face with an
tests/les_miserables.txt:57301:“Do you know what, Monsieur Marius? It puzzled me because you entered
tests/les_miserables.txt:57302:that garden; it was stupid, because it was I who showed you that house;
tests/les_miserables.txt:57312:She continued:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57314:“You see, you are lost! Now, no one can get out of the barricade. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:57315:was I who led you here, by the way! You are going to die, I count upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:57317:muzzle of the gun. How queer it is! But it was because I wanted to die
tests/les_miserables.txt:57318:before you. When I received that bullet, I dragged myself here, no one
tests/les_miserables.txt:57319:saw me, no one picked me up, I was waiting for you, I said: ‘So he is
tests/les_miserables.txt:57320:not coming!’ Oh, if you only knew. I bit my blouse, I suffered so! Now
tests/les_miserables.txt:57321:I am well. Do you remember the day I entered your chamber and when I
tests/les_miserables.txt:57322:looked at myself in your mirror, and the day when I came to you on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57325:your money.’ I hope you picked up your coin? You are not rich. I did
tests/les_miserables.txt:57326:not think to tell you to pick it up. The sun was shining bright, and it
tests/les_miserables.txt:57327:was not cold. Do you remember, Monsieur Marius? Oh! How happy I am!
tests/les_miserables.txt:57331:She had a mad, grave, and heart-breaking air. Her torn blouse disclosed
tests/les_miserables.txt:57334:As she talked, she pressed her pierced hand to her breast, where there
tests/les_miserables.txt:57335:was another hole, and whence there spurted from moment to moment a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57338:Marius gazed at this unfortunate creature with profound compassion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57340:“Oh!” she resumed, “it is coming again, I am stifling!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57343:She caught up her blouse and bit it, and her limbs stiffened on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57346:At that moment the young cock’s crow executed by little Gavroche
tests/les_miserables.txt:57347:resounded through the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57349:The child had mounted a table to load his gun, and was singing gayly
tests/les_miserables.txt:57370:“My brother is here. He must not see me. He would scold me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57375:which his father had bequeathed to him; “who is your brother?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57392:She was sitting almost upright, but her voice was very low and broken
tests/les_miserables.txt:57393:by hiccoughs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57395:At intervals, the death rattle interrupted her. She put her face as
tests/les_miserables.txt:57398:“Listen, I do not wish to play you a trick. I have a letter in my
tests/les_miserables.txt:57399:pocket for you. I was told to put it in the post. I kept it. I did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:57400:want to have it reach you. But perhaps you will be angry with me for it
tests/les_miserables.txt:57404:She grasped Marius’ hand convulsively with her pierced hand, but she no
tests/les_miserables.txt:57406:pocket of her blouse. There, in fact, Marius felt a paper.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57412:She made a sign of satisfaction and contentment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57430:She dropped her head again on Marius’ knees, and her eyelids closed. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:57432:once, at the very moment when Marius fancied her asleep forever, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:57433:slowly opened her eyes in which appeared the sombre profundity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57435:proceed from another world:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57441:She tried to smile once more and expired.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57450:the icy perspiration stood in beads.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57455:It was not without a tremor that he had taken the letter which Éponine
tests/les_miserables.txt:57457:He was impatient to read it. The heart of man is so constituted that
tests/les_miserables.txt:57458:the unhappy child had hardly closed her eyes when Marius began to think
tests/les_miserables.txt:57462:that he could not peruse that letter in the presence of that body.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57464:He drew near to a candle in the tap-room. It was a small note, folded
tests/les_miserables.txt:57465:and sealed with a woman’s elegant care. The address was in a woman’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:57468:“To Monsieur, Monsieur Marius Pontmercy, at M. Courfeyrac’s, Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:57479:Such was the innocence of their love that Marius was not even
tests/les_miserables.txt:57480:acquainted with Cosette’s handwriting.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57482:What had taken place may be related in a few words. Éponine had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:57483:the cause of everything. After the evening of the 3d of June she had
tests/les_miserables.txt:57484:cherished a double idea, to defeat the projects of her father and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57486:Cosette. She had exchanged rags with the first young scamp she came
tests/les_miserables.txt:57487:across who had thought it amusing to dress like a woman, while Éponine
tests/les_miserables.txt:57488:disguised herself like a man. It was she who had conveyed to Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:57490:house.” Jean Valjean had, in fact, returned home, and had said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:57493:overwhelmed by this unexpected blow, had hastily penned a couple of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57495:never went out alone, and Toussaint, surprised at such a commission,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57496:would certainly show the letter to M. Fauchelevent. In this dilemma,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57497:Cosette had caught sight through the fence of Éponine in man’s clothes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57498:who now prowled incessantly around the garden. Cosette had called to
tests/les_miserables.txt:57499:“this young workman” and had handed him five francs and the letter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57501:the letter in her pocket. The next day, on the 5th of June, she went to
tests/les_miserables.txt:57502:Courfeyrac’s quarters to inquire for Marius, not for the purpose of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57503:delivering the letter, but,—a thing which every jealous and loving soul
tests/les_miserables.txt:57504:will comprehend,—“to see.” There she had waited for Marius, or at least
tests/les_miserables.txt:57505:for Courfeyrac, still for the purpose of _seeing_. When Courfeyrac had
tests/les_miserables.txt:57506:told her: “We are going to the barricades,” an idea flashed through her
tests/les_miserables.txt:57508:other, and to thrust Marius into it also. She had followed Courfeyrac,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57509:had made sure of the locality where the barricade was in process of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57510:construction; and, quite certain, since Marius had received no warning,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57511:and since she had intercepted the letter, that he would go at dusk to
tests/les_miserables.txt:57512:his trysting place for every evening, she had betaken herself to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57514:his friends, the appeal which would, she thought, lead him to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57515:barricade. She reckoned on Marius’ despair when he should fail to find
tests/les_miserables.txt:57518:died with the tragic joy of jealous hearts who drag the beloved being
tests/les_miserables.txt:57522:Marius covered Cosette’s letter with kisses. So she loved him! For one
tests/les_miserables.txt:57523:moment the idea occurred to him that he ought not to die now. Then he
tests/les_miserables.txt:57525:England, and my grandfather refuses his consent to the marriage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57526:Nothing is changed in our fates.” Dreamers like Marius are subject to
tests/les_miserables.txt:57527:supreme attacks of dejection, and desperate resolves are the result.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57529:he reflected that he had still two duties to fulfil: to inform Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:57531:impending catastrophe which was in preparation, that poor child,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57534:He had a pocket-book about him; the same one which had contained the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57535:note-book in which he had inscribed so many thoughts of love for
tests/les_miserables.txt:57536:Cosette. He tore out a leaf and wrote on it a few lines in pencil:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57545:Having nothing wherewith to seal this letter, he contented himself with
tests/les_miserables.txt:57548:“To Mademoiselle Cosette Fauchelevent, at M. Fauchelevent’s, Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:57553:his pocket-book again, opened it, and wrote, with the same pencil,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57556:“My name is Marius Pontmercy. Carry my body to my grandfather, M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57560:He put his pocketbook back in his pocket, then he called Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57562:The gamin, at the sound of Marius’ voice, ran up to him with his merry
tests/les_miserables.txt:57568:“Anything,” said Gavroche. “Good God! if it had not been for you, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:57578:“Take it. Leave the barricade instantly” (Gavroche began to scratch his
tests/les_miserables.txt:57580:address to Mademoiselle Cosette, at M. Fauchelevent’s, Rue de l’Homme
tests/les_miserables.txt:57584:The heroic child replied
tests/les_miserables.txt:57586:“Well, but! in the meanwhile the barricade will be taken, and I shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:57590:“The barricade will not be attacked until daybreak, according to all
tests/les_miserables.txt:57591:appearances, and will not be taken before to-morrow noon.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57594:The fresh respite which the assailants were granting to the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:57595:had, in fact, been prolonged. It was one of those intermissions which
tests/les_miserables.txt:57596:frequently occur in nocturnal combats, which are always followed by an
tests/les_miserables.txt:57597:increase of rage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57599:“Well,” said Gavroche, “what if I were to go and carry your letter
tests/les_miserables.txt:57603:“It will be too late. The barricade will probably be blockaded, all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57605:once.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57608:Gavroche could think of no reply to this, and stood there in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57609:indecision, scratching his ear sadly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57611:All at once, he took the letter with one of those birdlike movements
tests/les_miserables.txt:57612:which were common with him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57618:An idea had occurred to Gavroche which had brought him to a decision,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57620:objection to it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57625:go and deliver the letter at once, and I shall get back in time.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:57639:What are the convulsions of a city in comparison with the insurrections
tests/les_miserables.txt:57643:the brink of an obscure and formidable revolution. A few hours had
tests/les_miserables.txt:57644:sufficed to bring this about. His destiny and his conscience had
tests/les_miserables.txt:57645:suddenly been covered with gloom. Of him also, as well as of Paris, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:57646:might have been said: “Two principles are face to face. The white angel
tests/les_miserables.txt:57647:and the black angel are about to seize each other on the bridge of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57648:abyss. Which of the two will hurl the other over? Who will carry the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57652:On the evening preceding this same 5th of June, Jean Valjean,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57653:accompanied by Cosette and Toussaint had installed himself in the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:57654:de l’Homme Armé. A change awaited him there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57657:resistance. For the first time since they had lived side by side,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57658:Cosette’s will and the will of Jean Valjean had proved to be distinct,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57659:and had been in opposition, at least, if they had not clashed. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:57660:had been objections on one side and inflexibility on the other. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:57661:abrupt advice: “Leave your house,” hurled at Jean Valjean by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57663:thought that he had been traced and followed. Cosette had been obliged
tests/les_miserables.txt:57667:and without uttering a word, each being absorbed in his own personal
tests/les_miserables.txt:57668:preoccupation; Jean Valjean so uneasy that he did not notice Cosette’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:57669:sadness, Cosette so sad that she did not notice Jean Valjean’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:57672:Jean Valjean had taken Toussaint with him, a thing which he had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:57673:done in his previous absences. He perceived the possibility of not
tests/les_miserables.txt:57674:returning to the Rue Plumet, and he could neither leave Toussaint
tests/les_miserables.txt:57675:behind nor confide his secret to her. Besides, he felt that she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:57676:devoted and trustworthy. Treachery between master and servant begins in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57677:curiosity. Now Toussaint, as though she had been destined to be Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:57678:Valjean’s servant, was not curious. She stammered in her peasant
tests/les_miserables.txt:57679:dialect of Barneville: “I am made so; I do my work; the rest is no
tests/les_miserables.txt:57683:In this departure from the Rue Plumet, which had been almost a flight,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57684:Jean Valjean had carried away nothing but the little embalmed valise,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57686:porters, and porters are witnesses. A fiacre had been summoned to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57689:It was with difficulty that Toussaint had obtained permission to pack
tests/les_miserables.txt:57690:up a little linen and clothes and a few toilet articles. Cosette had
tests/les_miserables.txt:57695:only at dusk, which had allowed Cosette time to write her note to
tests/les_miserables.txt:57699:They had gone to bed in silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57701:The lodgings in the Rue de l’Homme Armé were situated on a back court,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57702:on the second floor, and were composed of two sleeping-rooms, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57703:dining-room and a kitchen adjoining the dining-room, with a garret
tests/les_miserables.txt:57704:where there was a folding-bed, and which fell to Toussaint’s share. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:57705:dining-room was an antechamber as well, and separated the two bedrooms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57706:The apartment was provided with all necessary utensils.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57708:People re-acquire confidence as foolishly as they lose it; human nature
tests/les_miserables.txt:57709:is so constituted. Hardly had Jean Valjean reached the Rue de l’Homme
tests/les_miserables.txt:57711:are soothing spots which act in some sort mechanically on the mind. An
tests/les_miserables.txt:57712:obscure street, peaceable inhabitants. Jean Valjean experienced an
tests/les_miserables.txt:57713:indescribable contagion of tranquillity in that alley of ancient Paris,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57714:which is so narrow that it is barred against carriages by a transverse
tests/les_miserables.txt:57715:beam placed on two posts, which is deaf and dumb in the midst of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57716:clamorous city, dimly lighted at midday, and is, so to speak, incapable
tests/les_miserables.txt:57717:of emotions between two rows of lofty houses centuries old, which hold
tests/les_miserables.txt:57718:their peace like ancients as they are. There was a touch of stagnant
tests/les_miserables.txt:57719:oblivion in that street. Jean Valjean drew his breath once more there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57720:How could he be found there?
tests/les_miserables.txt:57722:His first care was to place _the inseparable_ beside him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57726:the dining-room charming, though it was hideous, furnished with an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:57728:dilapidated armchair, and several plain chairs which were encumbered
tests/les_miserables.txt:57729:with Toussaint’s packages. In one of these packages Jean Valjean’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:57733:did not make her appearance until evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57735:About five o’clock, Toussaint, who was going and coming and busying
tests/les_miserables.txt:57736:herself with the tiny establishment, set on the table a cold chicken,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57737:which Cosette, out of deference to her father, consented to glance at.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57739:That done, Cosette, under the pretext of an obstinate sick headache,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57741:chamber. Jean Valjean had eaten a wing of the chicken with a good
tests/les_miserables.txt:57742:appetite, and with his elbows on the table, having gradually recovered
tests/les_miserables.txt:57743:his serenity, had regained possession of his sense of security.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57745:While he was discussing this modest dinner, he had, twice or thrice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57746:noticed in a confused way, Toussaint’s stammering words as she said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:57748:Paris.” But absorbed in a throng of inward calculations, he had paid no
tests/les_miserables.txt:57750:to pace from the door to the window and from the window to the door,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57753:With this calm, Cosette, his sole anxiety, recurred to his thoughts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57754:Not that he was troubled by this headache, a little nervous crisis, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57755:young girl’s fit of sulks, the cloud of a moment, there would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:57758:saw no obstacle to their happy life resuming its course. At certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:57761:generally succeed the bad ones, as day follows night, by virtue of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:57762:law of succession and of contrast which lies at the very foundation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57763:nature, and which superficial minds call antithesis. In this peaceful
tests/les_miserables.txt:57765:been troubling him for some time past. This very fact, that he had seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:57766:many shadows, made him begin to perceive a little azure. To have
tests/les_miserables.txt:57767:quitted the Rue Plumet without complications or incidents was one good
tests/les_miserables.txt:57768:step already accomplished. Perhaps it would be wise to go abroad, if
tests/les_miserables.txt:57770:What difference did it make to him whether he was in France or in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57772:Cosette sufficed for his happiness; the idea that he, perhaps, did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:57773:suffice for Cosette’s happiness, that idea which had formerly been the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57774:cause of his fever and sleeplessness, did not even present itself to
tests/les_miserables.txt:57775:his mind. He was in a state of collapse from all his past sufferings,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57777:seemed to be his; an optical illusion which every one has experienced.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57778:He arranged in his own mind, with all sorts of felicitous devices, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:57779:departure for England with Cosette, and he beheld his felicity
tests/les_miserables.txt:57780:reconstituted wherever he pleased, in the perspective of his reverie.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57782:As he paced to and fro with long strides, his glance suddenly
tests/les_miserables.txt:57783:encountered something strange.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57785:In the inclined mirror facing him which surmounted the sideboard, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:57786:saw the four lines which follow:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57793:Jean Valjean halted, perfectly haggard.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57795:Cosette on her arrival had placed her blotting-book on the sideboard in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57798:left it wide open, and open at precisely the page on which she had laid
tests/les_miserables.txt:57799:to dry the four lines which she had penned, and which she had given in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57800:charge of the young workman in the Rue Plumet. The writing had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:57803:The mirror reflected the writing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57805:The result was, what is called in geometry, _the symmetrical image_; so
tests/les_miserables.txt:57807:and presented its natural appearance; and Jean Valjean had beneath his
tests/les_miserables.txt:57808:eyes the letter written by Cosette to Marius on the preceding evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57813:but he did not believe them. They produced on him the effect of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57814:appearing in a flash of lightning. It was a hallucination, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:57817:Little by little, his perceptions became more precise; he looked at
tests/les_miserables.txt:57818:Cosette’s blotting-book, and the consciousness of the reality returned
tests/les_miserables.txt:57819:to him. He caught up the blotter and said: “It comes from there.” He
tests/les_miserables.txt:57821:reversal of the letters converted into an odd scrawl, and he saw no
tests/les_miserables.txt:57824:inexpressible relief. Who has not experienced those foolish joys in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57828:He held the blotter in his hand and contemplated it in stupid delight,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57829:almost ready to laugh at the hallucination of which he had been the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57830:dupe. All at once his eyes fell upon the mirror again, and again he
tests/les_miserables.txt:57832:clearness. This time it was no mirage. The recurrence of a vision is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57837:armchair beside the buffet, with drooping head, and glassy eyes, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57839:of the world had been eclipsed forever, and that Cosette had written
tests/les_miserables.txt:57840:that to some one. Then he heard his soul, which had become terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:57841:once more, give vent to a dull roar in the gloom. Try then the effect
tests/les_miserables.txt:57842:of taking from the lion the dog which he has in his cage!
tests/les_miserables.txt:57845:received Cosette’s letter; chance had treacherously carried it to Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:57847:had not been vanquished by trial. He had been subjected to fearful
tests/les_miserables.txt:57848:proofs; no violence of bad fortune had been spared him; the ferocity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57849:fate, armed with all vindictiveness and all social scorn, had taken him
tests/les_miserables.txt:57850:for her prey and had raged against him. He had accepted every extremity
tests/les_miserables.txt:57851:when it had been necessary; he had sacrificed his inviolability as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57854:stoical to such a point that he might have been thought to be absent
tests/les_miserables.txt:57855:from himself like a martyr. His conscience inured to every assault of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57857:who had beheld his spiritual self would have been obliged to concede
tests/les_miserables.txt:57858:that it weakened at that moment. It was because, of all the tortures
tests/les_miserables.txt:57859:which he had undergone in the course of this long inquisition to which
tests/les_miserables.txt:57860:destiny had doomed him, this was the most terrible. Never had such
tests/les_miserables.txt:57861:pincers seized him hitherto. He felt the mysterious stirring of all his
tests/les_miserables.txt:57862:latent sensibilities. He felt the plucking at the strange chord. Alas!
tests/les_miserables.txt:57866:Poor old Jean Valjean certainly did not love Cosette otherwise than as
tests/les_miserables.txt:57868:the widowhood of his life had introduced all the shades of love; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:57871:love or a wife, as nature is a creditor who accepts no protest, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:57873:vague, ignorant, pure with the purity of blindness, unconscious,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57874:celestial, angelic, divine; less like a sentiment than like an
tests/les_miserables.txt:57875:instinct, less like an instinct than like an imperceptible and
tests/les_miserables.txt:57876:invisible but real attraction; and love, properly speaking, was, in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:57878:mountain, concealed and virgin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57880:Let the reader recall the situation of heart which we have already
tests/les_miserables.txt:57881:indicated. No marriage was possible between them; not even that of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57882:souls; and yet, it is certain that their destinies were wedded. With
tests/les_miserables.txt:57883:the exception of Cosette, that is to say, with the exception of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57884:childhood, Jean Valjean had never, in the whole of his long life, known
tests/les_miserables.txt:57885:anything of that which may be loved. The passions and loves which
tests/les_miserables.txt:57886:succeed each other had not produced in him those successive green
tests/les_miserables.txt:57887:growths, tender green or dark green, which can be seen in foliage which
tests/les_miserables.txt:57889:have insisted on it more than once, all this interior fusion, all this
tests/les_miserables.txt:57890:whole, of which the sum total was a lofty virtue, ended in rendering
tests/les_miserables.txt:57893:Jean Valjean; a father in whom there was included even a mother; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57894:father who loved Cosette and adored her, and who held that child as his
tests/les_miserables.txt:57895:light, his home, his family, his country, his paradise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57897:Thus when he saw that the end had absolutely come, that she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:57898:escaping from him, that she was slipping from his hands, that she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:57899:gliding from him, like a cloud, like water, when he had before his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:57900:this crushing proof: “another is the goal of her heart, another is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57902:her father, I no longer exist”; when he could no longer doubt, when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:57903:said to himself: “She is going away from me!” the grief which he felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:57910:There is such a thing as the sudden giving way of the inward subsoil. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:57911:despairing certainty does not make its way into a man without thrusting
tests/les_miserables.txt:57912:aside and breaking certain profound elements which, in some cases, are
tests/les_miserables.txt:57914:flight of all the forces of the conscience. These are fatal crises. Few
tests/les_miserables.txt:57916:the limit of endurance is overstepped, the most imperturbable virtue is
tests/les_miserables.txt:57917:disconcerted. Jean Valjean took the blotter again, and convinced
tests/les_miserables.txt:57919:staring eyes, over those four unobjectionable lines; and there arose
tests/les_miserables.txt:57920:within him such a cloud that one might have thought that everything in
tests/les_miserables.txt:57921:this soul was crumbling away.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57924:an apparent and terrifying calmness, for it is a fearful thing when a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57925:man’s calmness reaches the coldness of the statue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57927:He measured the terrible step which his destiny had taken without his
tests/les_miserables.txt:57928:having a suspicion of the fact; he recalled his fears of the preceding
tests/les_miserables.txt:57929:summer, so foolishly dissipated; he recognized the precipice, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:57933:The unprecedented and heart-rending thing about it was that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:57934:fallen without perceiving it. All the light of his life had departed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57935:while he still fancied that he beheld the sun.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57937:His instinct did not hesitate. He put together certain circumstances,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57938:certain dates, certain blushes and certain pallors on Cosette’s part,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57942:The divination of despair is a sort of mysterious bow which never
tests/les_miserables.txt:57943:misses its aim. He struck Marius with his first conjecture. He did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:57944:know the name, but he found the man instantly. He distinctly perceived,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57945:in the background of the implacable conjuration of his memories, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57946:unknown prowler of the Luxembourg, that wretched seeker of love
tests/les_miserables.txt:57947:adventures, that idler of romance, that idiot, that coward, for it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:57948:cowardly to come and make eyes at young girls who have beside them a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57951:After he had thoroughly verified the fact that this young man was at
tests/les_miserables.txt:57952:the bottom of this situation, and that everything proceeded from that
tests/les_miserables.txt:57956:own breast and there beheld a spectre, Hate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:57958:Great griefs contain something of dejection. They discourage one with
tests/les_miserables.txt:57959:existence. The man into whom they enter feels something within him
tests/les_miserables.txt:57962:is hot, when the hair is black, when the head is erect on the body like
tests/les_miserables.txt:57963:the flame on the torch, when the roll of destiny still retains its full
tests/les_miserables.txt:57964:thickness, when the heart, full of desirable love, still possesses
tests/les_miserables.txt:57965:beats which can be returned to it, when one has time for redress, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:57967:before one, when the force of life is complete, what is it in old age,
tests/les_miserables.txt:57977:Toussaint was struck dumb, and could only answer him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:57986:“Ah! yes, sir,” replied Toussaint. “It is in the direction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:57990:There is a mechanical movement which comes to us, unconsciously, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:57992:impulse of a movement of this sort, and of which he was hardly
tests/les_miserables.txt:57993:conscious, that Jean Valjean, five minutes later, found himself in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:57999:Night had come.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58007:How long did he remain thus? What was the ebb and flow of this tragic
tests/les_miserables.txt:58010:conscience upon something solid? He probably would not have been able
tests/les_miserables.txt:58014:returning home, hardly saw him. Each one for himself in times of peril.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58015:The lamp-lighter came as usual to light the lantern which was situated
tests/les_miserables.txt:58016:precisely opposite the door of No. 7, and then went away. Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:58019:a form of ice. There is congealment in despair. The alarm bells and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58021:convulsions of the bell mingled with the revolt, the clock of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58022:Saint-Paul struck eleven, gravely and without haste; for the tocsin is
tests/les_miserables.txt:58023:man; the hour is God. The passage of the hour produced no effect on
tests/les_miserables.txt:58025:brusque report burst forth in the direction of the Halles, a second yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:58026:more violent followed; it was probably that attack on the barricade in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58027:the Rue de la Chanvrerie which we have just seen repulsed by Marius. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:58028:this double discharge, whose fury seemed augmented by the stupor of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58030:whence the noise proceeded; then he fell back upon the post again,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58035:All at once, he raised his eyes; some one was walking in the street, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:58037:the direction of the street which ran into the Rue-aux-Archives, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:58038:perceived a young, livid, and beaming face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58040:Gavroche had just arrived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58042:Gavroche was staring into the air, apparently in search of something.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58043:He saw Jean Valjean perfectly well but he took no notice of him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58045:Gavroche after staring into the air, stared below; he raised himself on
tests/les_miserables.txt:58047:were all shut, bolted, and padlocked. After having authenticated the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58048:fronts of five or six barricaded houses in this manner, the urchin
tests/les_miserables.txt:58058:impelled to accost that child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58062:“The matter with me is that I am hungry,” replied Gavroche frankly. And
tests/les_miserables.txt:58066:Jean Valjean fumbled in his fob and pulled out a five-franc piece.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58068:But Gavroche, who was of the wagtail species, and who skipped
tests/les_miserables.txt:58069:vivaciously from one gesture to another, had just picked up a stone. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:58070:had caught sight of the lantern.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58078:such a clatter that the bourgeois in hiding behind their curtains in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58079:the opposite house cried: “There is ‘Ninety-three’ come again.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58082:The lantern oscillated violently, and went out. The street had suddenly
tests/les_miserables.txt:58083:become black.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58085:“That’s right, old street,” ejaculated Gavroche, “put on your
tests/les_miserables.txt:58086:night-cap.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58091:“What do you call that gigantic monument that you have there at the end
tests/les_miserables.txt:58092:of the street? It’s the Archives, isn’t it? I must crumble up those big
tests/les_miserables.txt:58093:stupids of pillars a bit and make a nice barricade out of them.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58096:Jean Valjean stepped up to Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58098:“Poor creature,” he said in a low tone, and speaking to himself, “he is
tests/les_miserables.txt:58102:And he laid the hundred-sou piece in his hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58104:Gavroche raised his face, astonished at the size of this sou; he stared
tests/les_miserables.txt:58106:knew five-franc pieces by hearsay; their reputation was agreeable to
tests/les_miserables.txt:58107:him; he was delighted to see one close to. He said:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:58109:“Let us contemplate the tiger.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58112:He gazed at it for several minutes in ecstasy; then, turning to Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:58113:Valjean, he held out the coin to him, and said majestically to him:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:58115:“Bourgeois, I prefer to smash lanterns. Take back your ferocious beast.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58116:You can’t bribe me. That has got five claws; but it doesn’t scratch
tests/les_miserables.txt:58122:Gavroche replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:58130:Gavroche was touched. Moreover, he had just noticed that the man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:58131:was addressing him had no hat, and this inspired him with confidence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58139:“You’re a fine man,” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58141:And he put the five-franc piece into one of his pockets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58143:His confidence having increased, he added:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:58157:Here the child paused, he feared that he had said too much; he thrust
tests/les_miserables.txt:58158:his nails energetically into his hair and contented himself with
tests/les_miserables.txt:58167:“Are you the person who is bringing a letter that I am expecting?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58170:“You?” said Gavroche. “You are not a woman.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58176:“Cosette,” muttered Gavroche. “Yes, I believe that is the queer name.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58183:“In that case, you must know that I was sent from the barricade.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58186:“Of course,” said Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58188:Gavroche engulfed his hand in another of his pockets and drew out a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58193:“Respect for despatches,” said he. “It comes from the Provisional
tests/les_miserables.txt:58199:Gavroche held the paper elevated above his head.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58201:“Don’t go and fancy it’s a love letter. It is for a woman, but it’s for
tests/les_miserables.txt:58202:the people. We men fight and we respect the fair sex. We are not as
tests/les_miserables.txt:58203:they are in fine society, where there are lions who send chickens55 to
tests/les_miserables.txt:58204:camels.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58210:“After all,” continued Gavroche, “you have the air of an honest man.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58213:“Give it to me quick.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58216:“Catch hold of it.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58225:Gavroche was satisfied with himself for having produced this remark.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58232:“There you are making some of those bits of pastry vulgarly called
tests/les_miserables.txt:58233:_brioches_ [blunders]. This letter comes from the barricade of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:58234:de la Chanvrerie, and I’m going back there. Good evening, citizen.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58237:That said, Gavroche took himself off, or, to describe it more exactly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58238:fluttered away in the direction whence he had come with a flight like
tests/les_miserables.txt:58239:that of an escaped bird. He plunged back into the gloom as though he
tests/les_miserables.txt:58240:made a hole in it, with the rigid rapidity of a projectile; the alley
tests/les_miserables.txt:58241:of l’Homme Armé became silent and solitary once more; in a twinkling,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58242:that strange child, who had about him something of the shadow and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58243:the dream, had buried himself in the mists of the rows of black houses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58245:that he had dissipated and vanished, had there not taken place, a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:58246:minutes after his disappearance, a startling shiver of glass, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:58247:not the magnificent crash of a lantern rattling down on the pavement
tests/les_miserables.txt:58248:once more abruptly awakened the indignant bourgeois. It was Gavroche
tests/les_miserables.txt:58261:whether he could hear any noise,—made sure that, to all appearances,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58262:Cosette and Toussaint were asleep, and plunged three or four matches
tests/les_miserables.txt:58263:into the bottle of the Fumade lighter before he could evoke a spark, so
tests/les_miserables.txt:58264:greatly did his hand tremble. What he had just done smacked of theft.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58265:At last the candle was lighted; he leaned his elbows on the table,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58269:speak, the paper which one holds, one clutches it like a victim, one
tests/les_miserables.txt:58270:crushes it, one digs into it the nails of one’s wrath, or of one’s joy;
tests/les_miserables.txt:58279:In the presence of these two lines, he was horribly dazzled; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:58280:remained for a moment, crushed, as it were, by the change of emotion
tests/les_miserables.txt:58281:which was taking place within him, he stared at Marius’ note with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58282:sort of intoxicated amazement, he had before his eyes that splendor,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58285:He uttered a frightful cry of inward joy. So it was all over. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:58286:catastrophe had arrived sooner than he had dared to hope. The being who
tests/les_miserables.txt:58287:obstructed his destiny was disappearing. That man had taken himself off
tests/les_miserables.txt:58288:of his own accord, freely, willingly. This man was going to his death,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58291:entered into calculations. No, he is not dead yet. The letter had
tests/les_miserables.txt:58293:after the two discharges that were heard between eleven o’clock and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58294:midnight, nothing more has taken place; the barricade will not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:58295:attacked seriously until daybreak; but that makes no difference, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:58296:the moment when “that man” is concerned in this war, he is lost; he is
tests/les_miserables.txt:58297:caught in the gearing. Jean Valjean felt himself delivered. So he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:58298:about to find himself alone with Cosette once more. The rivalry would
tests/les_miserables.txt:58299:cease; the future was beginning again. He had but to keep this note in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58300:his pocket. Cosette would never know what had become of that man. All
tests/les_miserables.txt:58301:that there requires to be done is to let things take their own course.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58302:This man cannot escape. If he is not already dead, it is certain that
tests/les_miserables.txt:58305:Having said all this to himself, he became gloomy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58309:About an hour later, Jean Valjean went out in the complete costume of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58311:neighborhood the wherewithal to complete his equipment. He had a loaded
tests/les_miserables.txt:58312:gun and a cartridge-box filled with cartridges.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58314:He strode off in the direction of the markets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58322:In the meantime, Gavroche had had an adventure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58324:Gavroche, after having conscientiously stoned the lantern in the Rue du
tests/les_miserables.txt:58326:a cat” there, he thought the opportunity a good one to strike up all
tests/les_miserables.txt:58327:the song of which he was capable. His march, far from being retarded by
tests/les_miserables.txt:58328:his singing, was accelerated by it. He began to sow along the sleeping
tests/les_miserables.txt:58329:or terrified houses these incendiary couplets:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:58331:“L’oiseau médit dans les charmilles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58333:Avec un Russe s’en alla.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58338:Parce que l’autre jour Mila
tests/les_miserables.txt:58344:Leur poison qui m’ensorcela
tests/les_miserables.txt:58362:Tu coiffes de roses Lola,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58363:Je me damnerais pour cela.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58368:Mon cœur un beau jour s’envola.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58369:Je crois que c’est Jeanne qui l’a.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58380:Gavroche, as he sang, was lavish of his pantomime. Gesture is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58381:strong point of the refrain. His face, an inexhaustible repertory of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58382:masks, produced grimaces more convulsing and more fantastic than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58383:rents of a cloth torn in a high gale. Unfortunately, as he was alone,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58384:and as it was night, this was neither seen nor even visible. Such
tests/les_miserables.txt:58385:wastes of riches do occur.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58387:All at once, he stopped short.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58389:“Let us interrupt the romance,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58391:His feline eye had just descried, in the recess of a carriage door,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58392:what is called in painting, an _ensemble_, that is to say, a person and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58393:a thing; the thing was a hand-cart, the person was a man from Auvergene
tests/les_miserables.txt:58396:The shafts of the cart rested on the pavement, and the Auvergnat’s head
tests/les_miserables.txt:58397:was supported against the front of the cart. His body was coiled up on
tests/les_miserables.txt:58398:this inclined plane and his feet touched the ground.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58400:Gavroche, with his experience of the things of this world, recognized a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58401:drunken man. He was some corner errand-man who had drunk too much and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58402:was sleeping too much.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58404:“There now,” thought Gavroche, “that’s what the summer nights are good
tests/les_miserables.txt:58405:for. We’ll take the cart for the Republic, and leave the Auvergnat for
tests/les_miserables.txt:58406:the Monarchy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58411:“How bully that cart would look on our barricade!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58416:Gavroche gently tugged at the cart from behind, and at the Auvergnat
tests/les_miserables.txt:58421:The cart was free.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58423:Gavroche, habituated to facing the unexpected in all quarters, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:58424:everything about him. He fumbled in one of his pockets, and pulled from
tests/les_miserables.txt:58425:it a scrap of paper and a bit of red pencil filched from some
tests/les_miserables.txt:58426:carpenter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58430:_“French Republic.”_
tests/les_miserables.txt:58432:“Received thy cart.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58437:That done, he put the paper in the pocket of the still snoring
tests/les_miserables.txt:58438:Auvergnat’s velvet vest, seized the cart shafts in both hands, and set
tests/les_miserables.txt:58439:off in the direction of the Halles, pushing the cart before him at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58443:Establishment. Gavroche did not think of this. This post was occupied
tests/les_miserables.txt:58445:heads were raised from camp beds. Two street lanterns broken in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58446:succession, that ditty sung at the top of the lungs. This was a great
tests/les_miserables.txt:58447:deal for those cowardly streets, which desire to go to sleep at sunset,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58448:and which put the extinguisher on their candles at such an early hour.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58449:For the last hour, that boy had been creating an uproar in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:58450:peaceable arrondissement, the uproar of a fly in a bottle. The sergeant
tests/les_miserables.txt:58453:The mad rattle of the cart, filled to overflowing the possible measure
tests/les_miserables.txt:58454:of waiting, and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58456:“There’s a whole band of them there!” said he, “let us proceed gently.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58459:It was clear that the hydra of anarchy had emerged from its box and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58462:And the sergeant ventured out of the post with cautious tread.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58464:All at once, Gavroche, pushing his cart in front of him, and at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58466:Vieilles-Haudriettes, found himself face to face with a uniform, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58469:For the second time, he stopped short.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58471:“Hullo,” said he, “it’s him. Good day, public order.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58474:Gavroche’s amazement was always brief and speedily thawed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58476:“Where are you going, you rascal?” shouted the sergeant.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58478:“Citizen,” retorted Gavroche, “I haven’t called you ‘bourgeois’ yet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58485:“Monsieur,” retorted Gavroche, “perhaps you were a man of wit
tests/les_miserables.txt:58492:Gavroche replied:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:58495:are. You ought to sell all your hair at a hundred francs apiece. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:58496:would yield you five hundred francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58503:Gavroche retorted again:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:58506:that they give you suck.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58511:“Will you tell me where you are going, you wretch?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58514:“General,” said Gavroche “I’m on my way to look for a doctor for my
tests/les_miserables.txt:58520:The master-stroke of strong men consists in saving themselves by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58521:very means that have ruined them; Gavroche took in the whole situation
tests/les_miserables.txt:58522:at a glance. It was the cart which had told against him, it was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58523:cart’s place to protect him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58525:At the moment when the sergeant was on the point of making his descent
tests/les_miserables.txt:58526:on Gavroche, the cart, converted into a projectile and launched with
tests/les_miserables.txt:58528:sergeant, struck full in the stomach, tumbled over backwards into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58532:the shot brought on a general random discharge, after which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:58538:In the meanwhile, Gavroche, who had retraced his steps at full speed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58540:stone post which forms the corner of the Enfants-Rouges.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58544:After panting for a few minutes, he turned in the direction where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58546:thrust it forward three times, as he slapped the back of his head with
tests/les_miserables.txt:58547:his right hand; an imperious gesture in which Parisian street-urchindom
tests/les_miserables.txt:58548:has condensed French irony, and which is evidently efficacious, since
tests/les_miserables.txt:58549:it has already lasted half a century.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58551:This gayety was troubled by one bitter reflection.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58555:roundabout way. If I only reach the barricade in season!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58567:“Mais il reste encore des bastilles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58569:Dans l’ordre public que voilà.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58574:Tout l’ancien monde s’écroula
tests/les_miserables.txt:58579:“Vieux bon peuple, à coups de béquilles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58580:Cassons ce Louvre où s’étala
tests/les_miserables.txt:58581:La monarchie en falbala.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58585:“Nous en avons forcé les grilles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58586:Le roi Charles-Dix ce jour-là,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58587:Tenait mal et se décolla.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58592:The post’s recourse to arms was not without result. The cart was
tests/les_miserables.txt:58593:conquered, the drunken man was taken prisoner. The first was put in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58594:pound, the second was later on somewhat harassed before the councils of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58595:war as an accomplice. The public ministry of the day proved its
tests/les_miserables.txt:58596:indefatigable zeal in the defence of society, in this instance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58598:Gavroche’s adventure, which has lingered as a tradition in the quarters
tests/les_miserables.txt:58601:nocturnal attack by the post of the Royal Printing Establishment.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:58615:[Illustration: Frontispiece Volume Five]
tests/les_miserables.txt:58631:The two most memorable barricades which the observer of social maladies
tests/les_miserables.txt:58632:can name do not belong to the period in which the action of this work
tests/les_miserables.txt:58633:is laid. These two barricades, both of them symbols, under two
tests/les_miserables.txt:58634:different aspects, of a redoubtable situation, sprang from the earth at
tests/les_miserables.txt:58635:the time of the fatal insurrection of June, 1848, the greatest war of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58638:It sometimes happens that, even contrary to principles, even contrary
tests/les_miserables.txt:58639:to liberty, equality, and fraternity, even contrary to the universal
tests/les_miserables.txt:58640:vote, even contrary to the government, by all for all, from the depths
tests/les_miserables.txt:58641:of its anguish, of its discouragements and its destitutions, of its
tests/les_miserables.txt:58642:fevers, of its distresses, of its miasmas, of its ignorances, of its
tests/les_miserables.txt:58644:and that the populace wages battle against, the people.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58646:Beggars attack the common right; the ochlocracy rises against demos.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58648:These are melancholy days; for there is always a certain amount of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58649:night even in this madness, there is suicide in this duel, and those
tests/les_miserables.txt:58650:words which are intended to be insults—beggars, canaille, ochlocracy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58651:populace—exhibit, alas! rather the fault of those who reign than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58655:For our own part, we never pronounce those words without pain and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58656:without respect, for when philosophy fathoms the facts to which they
tests/les_miserables.txt:58657:correspond, it often finds many a grandeur beside these miseries.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58658:Athens was an ochlocracy; the beggars were the making of Holland; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58659:populace saved Rome more than once; and the rabble followed Jesus
tests/les_miserables.txt:58662:There is no thinker who has not at times contemplated the magnificences
tests/les_miserables.txt:58663:of the lower classes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58667:people whence sprang the apostles and the martyrs, when he uttered this
tests/les_miserables.txt:58668:mysterious saying: _“Fex urbis, lex orbis,”_—the dregs of the city, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58671:The exasperations of this crowd which suffers and bleeds, its violences
tests/les_miserables.txt:58672:contrary to all sense, directed against the principles which are its
tests/les_miserables.txt:58673:life, its masterful deeds against the right, are its popular _coups
tests/les_miserables.txt:58674:d’état_ and should be repressed. The man of probity sacrifices himself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58675:and out of his very love for this crowd, he combats it. But how
tests/les_miserables.txt:58676:excusable he feels it even while holding out against it! How he
tests/les_miserables.txt:58678:when, while doing that which it is one’s duty to do, one feels
tests/les_miserables.txt:58679:something which disconcerts one, and which would dissuade one from
tests/les_miserables.txt:58680:proceeding further; one persists, it is necessary, but conscience,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58681:though satisfied, is sad, and the accomplishment of duty is complicated
tests/les_miserables.txt:58684:June, 1848, let us hasten to say, was an exceptional fact, and almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:58685:impossible of classification, in the philosophy of history. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58686:words which we have just uttered, must be discarded, when it becomes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58687:question of this extraordinary revolt, in which one feels the holy
tests/les_miserables.txt:58688:anxiety of toil claiming its rights. It was necessary to combat it, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58689:this was a duty, for it attacked the republic. But what was June, 1848,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58692:Where the subject is not lost sight of, there is no digression; may we,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58694:two absolutely unique barricades of which we have just spoken and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:58695:characterized this insurrection.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58697:One blocked the entrance to the Faubourg Saint Antoine; the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:58698:defended the approach to the Faubourg du Temple; those before whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:58699:these two fearful masterpieces of civil war reared themselves beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:58702:The Saint-Antoine barricade was tremendous; it was three stories high,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58705:jagged, cut up, divided, crenelated, with an immense rent, buttressed
tests/les_miserables.txt:58706:with piles that were bastions in themselves throwing out capes here and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58707:there, powerfully backed up by two great promontories of houses of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58708:faubourg, it reared itself like a cyclopean dike at the end of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58709:formidable place which had seen the 14th of July. Nineteen barricades
tests/les_miserables.txt:58711:this principal barricade. At the very sight of it, one felt the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58712:agonizing suffering in the immense faubourg, which had reached that
tests/les_miserables.txt:58713:point of extremity when a distress may become a catastrophe. Of what
tests/les_miserables.txt:58714:was that barricade made? Of the ruins of three six-story houses
tests/les_miserables.txt:58716:others. It wore the lamentable aspect of all constructions of hatred,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58719:this door! this grating! this penthouse! this chimney-piece! this
tests/les_miserables.txt:58720:broken brazier! this cracked pot! Give all! cast away all! Push this
tests/les_miserables.txt:58722:collaboration of the pavement, the block of stone, the beam, the bar of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58723:iron, the rag, the scrap, the broken pane, the unseated chair, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58724:cabbage-stalk, the tatter, the rag, and the malediction. It was grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:58725:and it was petty. It was the abyss parodied on the public place by
tests/les_miserables.txt:58728:Sisyphus had thrown his rock there and Job his potsherd. Terrible, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58729:short. It was the acropolis of the barefooted. Overturned carts broke
tests/les_miserables.txt:58731:crossways, its axle pointing heavenward, and seemed a scar on that
tests/les_miserables.txt:58732:tumultuous façade; an omnibus hoisted gayly, by main force, to the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:58733:summit of the heap, as though the architects of this bit of savagery
tests/les_miserables.txt:58734:had wished to add a touch of the street urchin humor to their terror,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58736:of the air. This gigantic heap, the alluvium of the revolt, figured to
tests/les_miserables.txt:58740:the trouble and this barricade was worthy to figure on the very spot
tests/les_miserables.txt:58741:whence the Bastille had disappeared. If the ocean made dikes, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:58743:shapeless mass. What flood? The crowd. One thought one beheld hubbub
tests/les_miserables.txt:58744:petrified. One thought one heard humming above this barricade as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:58746:progress. Was it a thicket? Was it a bacchanalia? Was it a fortress?
tests/les_miserables.txt:58747:Vertigo seemed to have constructed it with blows of its wings. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:58748:was something of the cesspool in that redoubt and something Olympian in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58749:that confusion. One there beheld in a pell-mell full of despair, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58752:cannon, wrecks of chimneys, cupboards, tables, benches, howling
tests/les_miserables.txt:58753:topsyturveydom, and those thousand poverty-stricken things, the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:58754:refuse of the mendicant, which contain at the same time fury and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58757:Antoine had thrust it there at its door, with a colossal flourish of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58758:the broom making of its misery its barricade. Blocks resembling
tests/les_miserables.txt:58759:headsman’s blocks, dislocated chains, pieces of woodwork with brackets
tests/les_miserables.txt:58760:having the form of gibbets, horizontal wheels projecting from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58761:rubbish, amalgamated with this edifice of anarchy the sombre figure of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58762:the old tortures endured by the people. The barricade Saint Antoine
tests/les_miserables.txt:58763:converted everything into a weapon; everything that civil war could
tests/les_miserables.txt:58764:throw at the head of society proceeded thence; it was not combat, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:58765:was a paroxysm; the carbines which defended this redoubt, among which
tests/les_miserables.txt:58767:coat-buttons, even the casters from night-stands, dangerous projectiles
tests/les_miserables.txt:58768:on account of the brass. This barricade was furious; it hurled to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58769:clouds an inexpressible clamor; at certain moments, when provoking the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58770:army, it was covered with throngs and tempest; a tumultuous crowd of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58771:flaming heads crowned it; a swarm filled it; it had a thorny crest of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58772:guns, of sabres, of cudgels, of axes, of pikes and of bayonets; a vast
tests/les_miserables.txt:58773:red flag flapped in the wind; shouts of command, songs of attack, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58776:back of an electric beast, there proceeded from it little flashes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58777:lightning. The spirit of revolution covered with its cloud this summit
tests/les_miserables.txt:58778:where rumbled that voice of the people which resembles the voice of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58779:God; a strange majesty was emitted by this titanic basket of rubbish.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58782:As we have said previously, it attacked in the name of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58783:revolution—what? The revolution. It—that barricade, chance, hazard,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58784:disorder, terror, misunderstanding, the unknown—had facing it the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58786:suffrage, the nation, the republic; and it was the Carmagnole bidding
tests/les_miserables.txt:58787:defiance to the Marseillaise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58789:Immense but heroic defiance, for the old faubourg is a hero.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58791:The faubourg and its redoubt lent each other assistance. The faubourg
tests/les_miserables.txt:58792:shouldered the redoubt, the redoubt took its stand under cover of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58793:faubourg. The vast barricade spread out like a cliff against which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58794:strategy of the African generals dashed itself. Its caverns, its
tests/les_miserables.txt:58795:excrescences, its warts, its gibbosities, grimaced, so to speak, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58797:bombs plunged into it; bullets only succeeded in making holes in it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:58798:what was the use of cannonading chaos? and the regiments, accustomed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:58799:the fiercest visions of war, gazed with uneasy eyes on that species of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58803:A quarter of a league away, from the corner of the Rue du Temple which
tests/les_miserables.txt:58804:debouches on the boulevard near the Château-d’Eau, if one thrust one’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:58806:shop, one perceived in the distance, beyond the canal, in the street
tests/les_miserables.txt:58807:which mounts the slopes of Belleville at the culminating point of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58808:rise, a strange wall reaching to the second story of the house fronts,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58810:left, as though the street had folded back on itself its loftiest wall
tests/les_miserables.txt:58811:in order to close itself abruptly. This wall was built of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58812:paving-stones. It was straight, correct, cold, perpendicular, levelled
tests/les_miserables.txt:58813:with the square, laid out by rule and line. Cement was lacking, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58814:course, but, as in the case of certain Roman walls, without interfering
tests/les_miserables.txt:58815:with its rigid architecture. The entablature was mathematically
tests/les_miserables.txt:58816:parallel with the base. From distance to distance, one could
tests/les_miserables.txt:58817:distinguish on the gray surface, almost invisible loopholes which
tests/les_miserables.txt:58818:resembled black threads. These loopholes were separated from each other
tests/les_miserables.txt:58819:by equal spaces. The street was deserted as far as the eye could reach.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58820:All windows and doors were closed. In the background rose this barrier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58821:which made a blind thoroughfare of the street, a motionless and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58822:tranquil wall; no one was visible, nothing was audible; not a cry, not
tests/les_miserables.txt:58823:a sound, not a breath. A sepulchre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58827:It was the barricade of the Faubourg of the Temple.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58829:As soon as one arrived on the spot, and caught sight of it, it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:58830:impossible, even for the boldest, not to become thoughtful before this
tests/les_miserables.txt:58831:mysterious apparition. It was adjusted, jointed, imbricated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58832:rectilinear, symmetrical and funereal. Science and gloom met there. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:58833:felt that the chief of this barricade was a geometrician or a spectre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58836:From time to time, if some soldier, an officer or representative of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58837:people, chanced to traverse the deserted highway, a faint, sharp
tests/les_miserables.txt:58839:escaped the bullet, sometimes a biscaïen was seen to ensconce itself in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58840:some closed shutter, in the interstice between two blocks of stone, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:58841:in the plaster of a wall. For the men in the barricade had made
tests/les_miserables.txt:58842:themselves two small cannons out of two cast-iron lengths of gas-pipe,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58843:plugged up at one end with tow and fire-clay. There was no waste of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58844:useless powder. Nearly every shot told. There were corpses here and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58846:which went and came in the street. Summer does not abdicate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58848:In the neighborhood, the spaces beneath the portes-cochères were
tests/les_miserables.txt:58849:encumbered with wounded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58854:Massed behind the sort of sloping ridge which the vaulted canal forms
tests/les_miserables.txt:58855:at the entrance to the Faubourg du Temple, the soldiers of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58856:attacking column, gravely and thoughtfully, watched this dismal
tests/les_miserables.txt:58857:redoubt, this immobility, this passivity, whence sprang death. Some
tests/les_miserables.txt:58858:crawled flat on their faces as far as the crest of the curve of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58859:bridge, taking care that their shakos did not project beyond it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58861:The valiant Colonel Monteynard admired this barricade with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58863:paving-stone projects beyond its neighbor. It is made of porcelain.”—At
tests/les_miserables.txt:58864:that moment, a bullet broke the cross on his breast, and he fell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58866:“The cowards!” people said. “Let them show themselves. Let us see them!
tests/les_miserables.txt:58870:The barricade of the Faubourg du Temple, defended by eighty men,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58871:attacked by ten thousand, held out for three days. On the fourth, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:58872:did as at Zaatcha, as at Constantine, they pierced the houses, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:58873:came over the roofs, the barricade was taken. Not one of the eighty
tests/les_miserables.txt:58874:cowards thought of flight, all were killed there with the exception of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58877:The Saint-Antoine barricade was the tumult of thunders; the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:58878:of the Temple was silence. The difference between these two redoubts
tests/les_miserables.txt:58879:was the difference between the formidable and the sinister. One seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:58882:Admitting that the gigantic and gloomy insurrection of June was
tests/les_miserables.txt:58883:composed of a wrath and of an enigma, one divined in the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:58884:barricade the dragon, and behind the second the sphinx.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58886:These two fortresses had been erected by two men named, the one,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58888:barricade; Barthélemy the barricade of the Temple. Each was the image
tests/les_miserables.txt:58891:Cournet was a man of lofty stature; he had broad shoulders, a red face,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58892:a crushing fist, a bold heart, a loyal soul, a sincere and terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:58893:eye. Intrepid, energetic, irascible, stormy; the most cordial of men,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58894:the most formidable of combatants. War, strife, conflict, were the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:58895:air he breathed and put him in a good humor. He had been an officer in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58896:the navy, and, from his gestures and his voice, one divined that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:58897:sprang from the ocean, and that he came from the tempest; he carried
tests/les_miserables.txt:58898:the hurricane on into battle. With the exception of the genius, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:58899:was in Cournet something of Danton, as, with the exception of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58900:divinity, there was in Danton something of Hercules.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58902:Barthélemy, thin, feeble, pale, taciturn, was a sort of tragic street
tests/les_miserables.txt:58903:urchin, who, having had his ears boxed by a policeman, lay in wait for
tests/les_miserables.txt:58904:him, and killed him, and at seventeen was sent to the galleys. He came
tests/les_miserables.txt:58905:out and made this barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58907:Later on, fatal circumstance, in London, proscribed by all, Barthélemy
tests/les_miserables.txt:58908:slew Cournet. It was a funereal duel. Some time afterwards, caught in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58909:the gearing of one of those mysterious adventures in which passion
tests/les_miserables.txt:58910:plays a part, a catastrophe in which French justice sees extenuating
tests/les_miserables.txt:58911:circumstances, and in which English justice sees only death, Barthélemy
tests/les_miserables.txt:58912:was hanged. The sombre social construction is so made that, thanks to
tests/les_miserables.txt:58913:material destitution, thanks to moral obscurity, that unhappy being who
tests/les_miserables.txt:58914:possessed an intelligence, certainly firm, possibly great, began in
tests/les_miserables.txt:58915:France with the galleys, and ended in England with the gallows.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58916:Barthélemy, on occasion, flew but one flag, the black flag.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58924:Sixteen years count in the subterranean education of insurrection, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58926:barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie was only an outline, and an
tests/les_miserables.txt:58927:embryo compared to the two colossal barricades which we have just
tests/les_miserables.txt:58928:sketched; but it was formidable for that epoch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58931:after anything, had made good use of the night. The barricade had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:58933:iron planted in the pavement resembled lances in rest. All sorts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58934:rubbish brought and added from all directions complicated the external
tests/les_miserables.txt:58935:confusion. The redoubt had been cleverly made over, into a wall on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58936:inside and a thicket on the outside.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58938:The staircase of paving-stones which permitted one to mount it like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58939:wall of a citadel had been reconstructed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58941:The barricade had been put in order, the tap-room disencumbered, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58942:kitchen appropriated for the ambulance, the dressing of the wounded
tests/les_miserables.txt:58943:completed, the powder scattered on the ground and on the tables had
tests/les_miserables.txt:58944:been gathered up, bullets run, cartridges manufactured, lint scraped,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58945:the fallen weapons re-distributed, the interior of the redoubt cleaned,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58946:the rubbish swept up, corpses removed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58948:They laid the dead in a heap in the Mondétour lane, of which they were
tests/les_miserables.txt:58953:Enjolras had advised two hours of sleep. Advice from Enjolras was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58954:command. Still, only three or four took advantage of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58956:Feuilly employed these two hours in engraving this inscription on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58957:wall which faced the tavern:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:58961:These four words, hollowed out in the rough stone with a nail, could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:58965:definitely; which allowed the insurgents to breathe more freely.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58970:On a litter of mattresses and trusses of straw in the kitchen, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:58971:had been converted into an ambulance, there were five men gravely
tests/les_miserables.txt:58972:wounded, two of whom were municipal guardsmen. The municipal guardsmen
tests/les_miserables.txt:58975:In the tap-room there remained only Mabeuf under his black cloth and
tests/les_miserables.txt:58980:In the interior of this hall, barely lighted by a candle at one end,
tests/les_miserables.txt:58982:of vast, vague cross resulted from Javert erect and Mabeuf lying prone.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58985:still sufficiently upright to admit of their fastening the flag to it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58988:he said, attached to this staff the bullet-ridden and bloody coat of
tests/les_miserables.txt:58992:fifty men in the barricade had speedily exhausted the scanty provisions
tests/les_miserables.txt:58993:of the wine-shop during the sixteen hours which they had passed there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:58994:At a given moment, every barricade inevitably becomes the raft of _la
tests/les_miserables.txt:58996:then reached the first hours of that Spartan day of the 6th of June
tests/les_miserables.txt:58997:when, in the barricade Saint-Merry, Jeanne, surrounded by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:58998:insurgents who demanded bread, replied to all combatants crying:
tests/les_miserables.txt:58999:“Something to eat!” with: “Why? It is three o’clock; at four we shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:59003:As they could no longer eat, Enjolras forbade them to drink. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:59004:interdicted wine, and portioned out the brandy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59006:They had found in the cellar fifteen full bottles hermetically sealed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59007:Enjolras and Combeferre examined them. Combeferre when he came up again
tests/les_miserables.txt:59008:said:—“It’s the old stock of Father Hucheloup, who began business as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59009:grocer.”—“It must be real wine,” observed Bossuet. “It’s lucky that
tests/les_miserables.txt:59011:difficulty in saving those bottles.”—Enjolras, in spite of all murmurs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59012:placed his veto on the fifteen bottles, and, in order that no one might
tests/les_miserables.txt:59013:touch them, he had them placed under the table on which Father Mabeuf
tests/les_miserables.txt:59016:About two o’clock in the morning, they reckoned up their strength.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59019:The day began to dawn. The torch, which had been replaced in its cavity
tests/les_miserables.txt:59021:barricade, that species of tiny courtyard appropriated from the street,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59023:horror, the deck of a disabled ship. The combatants, as they went and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59024:came, moved about there like black forms. Above that terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:59025:nesting-place of gloom the stories of the mute houses were lividly
tests/les_miserables.txt:59026:outlined; at the very top, the chimneys stood palely out. The sky was
tests/les_miserables.txt:59027:of that charming, undecided hue, which may be white and may be blue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59028:Birds flew about in it with cries of joy. The lofty house which formed
tests/les_miserables.txt:59029:the back of the barricade, being turned to the East, had upon its roof
tests/les_miserables.txt:59030:a rosy reflection. The morning breeze ruffled the gray hair on the head
tests/les_miserables.txt:59033:“I am delighted that the torch has been extinguished,” said Courfeyrac
tests/les_miserables.txt:59034:to Feuilly. “That torch flickering in the wind annoyed me. It had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59035:appearance of being afraid. The light of torches resembles the wisdom
tests/les_miserables.txt:59036:of cowards; it gives a bad light because it trembles.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59041:Joly, perceiving a cat prowling on a gutter, extracted philosophy from
tests/les_miserables.txt:59044:“What is the cat?” he exclaimed. “It is a corrective. The good God,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59045:having made the mouse, said: ‘Hullo! I have committed a blunder.’ And
tests/les_miserables.txt:59046:so he made the cat. The cat is the erratum of the mouse. The mouse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59047:plus the cat, is the proof of creation revised and corrected.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59051:dead, of Jean Prouvaire, of Bahorel, of Mabeuf, and even of Cabuc, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59056:too late. Our hearts quiver so, and human life is such a mystery that,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59057:even in the case of a civic murder, even in a murder for liberation, if
tests/les_miserables.txt:59058:there be such a thing, the remorse for having struck a man surpasses
tests/les_miserables.txt:59059:the joy of having served the human race.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59062:And, such are the windings of the exchange of speech, that, a moment
tests/les_miserables.txt:59064:Combeferre was comparing the translators of the Georgics, Raux with
tests/les_miserables.txt:59066:by Malfilâtre, particularly the prodigies of Cæsar’s death; and at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:59067:word, Cæsar, the conversation reverted to Brutus.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59069:“Cæsar,” said Combeferre, “fell justly. Cicero was severe towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:59072:when Pope insults Shakspeare, when Frederic insults Voltaire, it is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:59073:old law of envy and hatred which is being carried out; genius attracts
tests/les_miserables.txt:59075:Cicero are two different persons. Cicero is an arbiter in thought, just
tests/les_miserables.txt:59077:last justice, the blade; but, antiquity admitted it. Cæsar, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59078:violator of the Rubicon, conferring, as though they came from him, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59079:dignities which emanated from the people, not rising at the entrance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59080:the senate, committed the acts of a king and almost of a tyrant, _regia
tests/les_miserables.txt:59081:ac pene tyrannica_. He was a great man; so much the worse, or so much
tests/les_miserables.txt:59083:touch me less than the spitting in the face of Jesus Christ. Cæsar is
tests/les_miserables.txt:59084:stabbed by the senators; Christ is cuffed by lackeys. One feels the God
tests/les_miserables.txt:59088:Bossuet, who towered above the interlocutors from the summit of a heap
tests/les_miserables.txt:59089:of paving-stones, exclaimed, rifle in hand:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:59091:“Oh Cydathenæum, Oh Myrrhinus, Oh Probalinthus, Oh graces of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59092:Æantides! Oh! Who will grant me to pronounce the verses of Homer like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59102:Enjolras had been to make a reconnaissance. He had made his way out
tests/les_miserables.txt:59103:through Mondétour lane, gliding along close to the houses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59105:The insurgents, we will remark, were full of hope. The manner in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:59106:they had repulsed the attack of the preceding night had caused them to
tests/les_miserables.txt:59107:almost disdain in advance the attack at dawn. They waited for it with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59108:smile. They had no more doubt as to their success than as to their
tests/les_miserables.txt:59109:cause. Moreover, succor was, evidently, on the way to them. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:59110:reckoned on it. With that facility of triumphant prophecy which is one
tests/les_miserables.txt:59111:of the sources of strength in the French combatant, they divided the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59112:day which was at hand into three distinct phases. At six o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59113:morning a regiment “which had been labored with,” would turn; at noon,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59114:the insurrection of all Paris; at sunset, revolution.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59116:They heard the alarm bell of Saint-Merry, which had not been silent for
tests/les_miserables.txt:59117:an instant since the night before; a proof that the other barricade,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59120:All these hopes were exchanged between the different groups in a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:59121:of gay and formidable whisper which resembled the warlike hum of a hive
tests/les_miserables.txt:59130:down upon the barricades in which you now are. There is the National
tests/les_miserables.txt:59131:Guard in addition. I have picked out the shakos of the fifth of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59133:will be attacked. As for the populace, it was seething yesterday,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59134:to-day it is not stirring. There is nothing to expect; nothing to hope
tests/les_miserables.txt:59138:These words fell upon the buzzing of the groups, and produced on them
tests/les_miserables.txt:59139:the effect caused on a swarm of bees by the first drops of a storm. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:59140:moment of indescribable silence ensued, in which death might have been
tests/les_miserables.txt:59145:A voice from the obscurest depths of the groups shouted to Enjolras:
tests/les_miserables.txt:59147:“So be it. Let us raise the barricade to a height of twenty feet, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59149:corpses. Let us show that, if the people abandon the republicans, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59150:republicans do not abandon the people.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59153:These words freed the thought of all from the painful cloud of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59154:individual anxieties. It was hailed with an enthusiastic acclamation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59158:that great anonymous, always mingled in human crises and in social
tests/les_miserables.txt:59160:decisive word, and who vanishes into the shadows after having
tests/les_miserables.txt:59164:of June, 1832, that, almost at the very same hour, on the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:59165:Saint-Merry, the insurgents were raising that clamor which has become a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59166:matter of history and which has been consigned to the documents in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59167:case:—“What matters it whether they come to our assistance or not? Let
tests/les_miserables.txt:59171:As the reader sees, the two barricades, though materially isolated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59172:were in communication with each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59180:After the man who decreed the “protest of corpses” had spoken, and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:59181:given this formula of their common soul, there issued from all mouths a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59182:strangely satisfied and terrible cry, funereal in sense and triumphant
tests/les_miserables.txt:59195:“The position is good; the barricade is fine. Thirty men are enough.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59196:Why sacrifice forty?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59201:“Because not one will go away.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59204:“Citizens,” cried Enjolras, and there was an almost irritated vibration
tests/les_miserables.txt:59205:in his voice, “this republic is not rich enough in men to indulge in
tests/les_miserables.txt:59210:Enjolras, the man-principle, had over his co-religionists that sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59211:omnipotent power which emanates from the absolute. Still, great as was
tests/les_miserables.txt:59212:this omnipotence, a murmur arose. A leader to the very finger-tips,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59220:“Besides,” observed a voice in one group, “it is easy enough to talk
tests/les_miserables.txt:59221:about leaving. The barricade is hemmed in.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59225:free, and through the Rue des Prêcheurs one can reach the Marché des
tests/les_miserables.txt:59226:Innocents.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59229:“And there,” went on another voice, “you would be captured. You would
tests/les_miserables.txt:59231:a man passing in blouse and cap. ‘Whence come you?’ ‘Don’t you belong
tests/les_miserables.txt:59232:to the barricade?’ And they will look at your hands. You smell of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59236:Enjolras, without making any reply, touched Combeferre’s shoulder, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59239:They emerged thence a moment later. Enjolras held in his outstretched
tests/les_miserables.txt:59240:hands the four uniforms which he had laid aside. Combeferre followed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59241:carrying the shoulder-belts and the shakos.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59243:“With this uniform,” said Enjolras, “you can mingle with the ranks and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59244:escape; here is enough for four.” And he flung on the ground, deprived
tests/les_miserables.txt:59247:No wavering took place in his stoical audience. Combeferre took the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59252:or are there not? Are there children or are there not? Are there
tests/les_miserables.txt:59253:mothers, yes or no, who rock cradles with their foot and who have a lot
tests/les_miserables.txt:59258:don’t make others die. Suicides like that which is on the brink of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59259:accomplishment here are sublime; but suicide is narrow, and does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:59260:admit of extension; and as soon as it touches your neighbors, suicide
tests/les_miserables.txt:59261:is murder. Think of the little blond heads; think of the white locks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59262:Listen, Enjolras has just told me that he saw at the corner of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:59263:du Cygne a lighted casement, a candle in a poor window, on the fifth
tests/les_miserables.txt:59265:woman, who had the air of having spent the night in watching. Perhaps
tests/les_miserables.txt:59269:relatives by one’s toil, one has not the right to sacrifice one’s self.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59273:begs, woman sells. Ah! those charming and gracious beings, so gracious
tests/les_miserables.txt:59276:the existence of angels in heaven by the purity of virgins on earth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59277:that Jeanne, that Lise, that Mimi, those adorable and honest creatures
tests/les_miserables.txt:59282:of the pavement covered with passers-by, think of the shops past which
tests/les_miserables.txt:59283:women go and come with necks all bare, and through the mire. These
tests/les_miserables.txt:59284:women, too, were pure once. Think of your sisters, those of you who
tests/les_miserables.txt:59285:have them. Misery, prostitution, the police, Saint-Lazare—that is what
tests/les_miserables.txt:59286:those beautiful, delicate girls, those fragile marvels of modesty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59287:gentleness and loveliness, fresher than lilacs in the month of May,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59288:will come to. Ah! you have got yourselves killed! You are no longer on
tests/les_miserables.txt:59290:and you deliver over your daughters to the police. Friends, have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59291:care, have mercy. Women, unhappy women, we are not in the habit of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59292:bestowing much thought on them. We trust to the women not having
tests/les_miserables.txt:59293:received a man’s education, we prevent their reading, we prevent their
tests/les_miserables.txt:59294:thinking, we prevent their occupying themselves with politics; will you
tests/les_miserables.txt:59295:prevent them from going to the dead-house this evening, and recognizing
tests/les_miserables.txt:59296:your bodies? Let us see, those who have families must be tractable, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59298:attend to this affair. I know well that courage is required to leave,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59300:‘I have a gun, I am at the barricade; so much the worse, I shall remain
tests/les_miserables.txt:59301:there.’ So much the worse is easily said. My friends, there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59303:what sufferings! See, here is a pretty, healthy child, with cheeks like
tests/les_miserables.txt:59304:an apple, who babbles, prattles, chatters, who laughs, who smells sweet
tests/les_miserables.txt:59305:beneath your kiss,—and do you know what becomes of him when he is
tests/les_miserables.txt:59306:abandoned? I have seen one, a very small creature, no taller than that.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59307:His father was dead. Poor people had taken him in out of charity, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:59308:they had bread only for themselves. The child was always hungry. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:59309:winter. He did not cry. You could see him approach the stove, in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:59310:there was never any fire, and whose pipe, you know, was of mastic and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59311:yellow clay. His breathing was hoarse, his face livid, his limbs
tests/les_miserables.txt:59312:flaccid, his belly prominent. He said nothing. If you spoke to him, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:59313:did not answer. He is dead. He was taken to the Necker Hospital, where
tests/les_miserables.txt:59316:holding their child’s tiny hand in their robust hand, let each one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59317:those fathers imagine that this child is his own. That poor brat, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:59318:remember, and I seem to see him now, when he lay nude on the dissecting
tests/les_miserables.txt:59320:grass in a cemetery. A sort of mud was found in his stomach. There were
tests/les_miserables.txt:59321:ashes in his teeth. Come, let us examine ourselves conscientiously and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59322:take counsel with our heart. Statistics show that the mortality among
tests/les_miserables.txt:59323:abandoned children is fifty-five per cent. I repeat, it is a question
tests/les_miserables.txt:59324:of women, it concerns mothers, it concerns young girls, it concerns
tests/les_miserables.txt:59325:little children. Who is talking to you of yourselves? We know well what
tests/les_miserables.txt:59328:life for the great cause; we know well that you feel yourselves elected
tests/les_miserables.txt:59329:to die usefully and magnificently, and that each one of you clings to
tests/les_miserables.txt:59337:Strange contradictions of the human heart at its most sublime moments.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59338:Combeferre, who spoke thus, was not an orphan. He recalled the mothers
tests/les_miserables.txt:59343:Marius, fasting, fevered, having emerged in succession from all hope,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59344:and having been stranded in grief, the most sombre of shipwrecks, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59345:saturated with violent emotions and conscious that the end was near,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59346:had plunged deeper and deeper into that visionary stupor which always
tests/les_miserables.txt:59347:precedes the fatal hour voluntarily accepted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59350:febrile absorption known to, and classified by, science, and which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:59352:ecstasy. Marius had reached this point. He looked on at everything as
tests/les_miserables.txt:59353:from without; as we have said, things which passed before him seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:59354:far away; he made out the whole, but did not perceive the details. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:59355:beheld men going and coming as through a flame. He heard voices
tests/les_miserables.txt:59358:But this moved him. There was in this scene a point which pierced and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59360:to be turned aside from it, but he reflected, in his gloomy
tests/les_miserables.txt:59364:He raised his voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59366:“Enjolras and Combeferre are right,” said he; “no unnecessary
tests/les_miserables.txt:59367:sacrifice. I join them, and you must make haste. Combeferre has said
tests/les_miserables.txt:59368:convincing things to you. There are some among you who have families,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59369:mothers, sisters, wives, children. Let such leave the ranks.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59377:His authority was great. Enjolras was certainly the head of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59378:barricade, but Marius was its savior.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59380:“I order it,” cried Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59384:Then, touched by Combeferre’s words, shaken by Enjolras’ order, touched
tests/les_miserables.txt:59385:by Marius’ entreaty, these heroic men began to denounce each other.—“It
tests/les_miserables.txt:59388:two sisters whom you maintain.”—And an unprecedented controversy broke
tests/les_miserables.txt:59389:forth. Each struggled to determine which should not allow himself to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:59390:placed at the door of the tomb.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59392:“Make haste,” said Courfeyrac, “in another quarter of an hour it will
tests/les_miserables.txt:59396:“Citizens,” pursued Enjolras, “this is the Republic, and universal
tests/les_miserables.txt:59401:unanimously selected and stepped out of the ranks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59403:“There are five of them!” exclaimed Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59415:have neither father nor mother, and what is to become of your three
tests/les_miserables.txt:59416:little brothers?”—“You are the father of five children.”—“You have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59420:These great revolutionary barricades were assembling points for
tests/les_miserables.txt:59422:each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59424:“Be quick,” repeated Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59431:“Yes,” said the five, “choose. We will obey you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59434:Marius did not believe that he was capable of another emotion. Still,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59435:at this idea, that of choosing a man for death, his blood rushed back
tests/les_miserables.txt:59437:to become any paler.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59439:He advanced towards the five, who smiled upon him, and each, with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:59440:eyes full of that grand flame which one beholds in the depths of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59441:history hovering over Thermopylæ, cried to him:
tests/les_miserables.txt:59446:And Marius stupidly counted them; there were still five of them! Then
tests/les_miserables.txt:59447:his glance dropped to the four uniforms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59454:Marius raised his eyes and recognized M. Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59456:Jean Valjean had just entered the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59459:made, or by instinct, or chance. Thanks to his dress of a National
tests/les_miserables.txt:59460:Guardsman, he had made his way without difficulty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59463:occasion to give the alarm for a single National Guardsman, and he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:59465:himself: “Probably it is a reinforcement, in any case it is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59469:At the moment when Jean Valjean entered the redoubt, no one had noticed
tests/les_miserables.txt:59470:him, all eyes being fixed on the five chosen men and the four uniforms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59472:coat and flung it on the pile with the rest.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59474:The emotion aroused was indescribable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59480:Marius added in a grave voice:
tests/les_miserables.txt:59489:“Welcome, citizen.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59506:The situation of all in that fatal hour and that pitiless place, had as
tests/les_miserables.txt:59507:result and culminating point Enjolras’ supreme melancholy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59510:incomplete, however, so far as the absolute can be so; he had too much
tests/les_miserables.txt:59511:of Saint-Just about him, and not enough of Anacharsis Cloots; still,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59512:his mind, in the society of the Friends of the A B C, had ended by
tests/les_miserables.txt:59513:undergoing a certain polarization from Combeferre’s ideas; for some
tests/les_miserables.txt:59515:dogma, and had allowed himself to incline to the broadening influence
tests/les_miserables.txt:59516:of progress, and he had come to accept, as a definitive and magnificent
tests/les_miserables.txt:59517:evolution, the transformation of the great French Republic, into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59518:immense human republic. As far as the immediate means were concerned, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59520:he never varied; and he remained of that epic and redoubtable school
tests/les_miserables.txt:59521:which is summed up in the words: “Eighty-three.” Enjolras was standing
tests/les_miserables.txt:59522:erect on the staircase of paving-stones, one elbow resting on the stock
tests/les_miserables.txt:59524:of prophetic breaths; places where death is have these effects of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59525:tripods. A sort of stifled fire darted from his eyes, which were filled
tests/les_miserables.txt:59526:with an inward look. All at once he threw back his head, his blond
tests/les_miserables.txt:59527:locks fell back like those of an angel on the sombre quadriga made of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59529:halo, and Enjolras cried:
tests/les_miserables.txt:59531:“Citizens, do you picture the future to yourselves? The streets of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59532:cities inundated with light, green branches on the thresholds, nations
tests/les_miserables.txt:59533:sisters, men just, old men blessing children, the past loving the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59535:equality, for religion heaven, God the direct priest, human conscience
tests/les_miserables.txt:59536:become an altar, no more hatreds, the fraternity of the workshop and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59537:the school, for sole penalty and recompense fame, work for all, right
tests/les_miserables.txt:59538:for all, peace over all, no more bloodshed, no more wars, happy
tests/les_miserables.txt:59539:mothers! To conquer matter is the first step; to realize the ideal is
tests/les_miserables.txt:59540:the second. Reflect on what progress has already accomplished.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59541:Formerly, the first human races beheld with terror the hydra pass
tests/les_miserables.txt:59542:before their eyes, breathing on the waters, the dragon which vomited
tests/les_miserables.txt:59544:the wings of an eagle and the talons of a tiger; fearful beasts which
tests/les_miserables.txt:59545:were above man. Man, nevertheless, spread his snares, consecrated by
tests/les_miserables.txt:59546:intelligence, and finally conquered these monsters. We have vanquished
tests/les_miserables.txt:59547:the hydra, and it is called the locomotive; we are on the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59548:vanquishing the griffin, we already grasp it, and it is called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59549:balloon. On the day when this Promethean task shall be accomplished,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59553:animated creation that which the ancient gods formerly were to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59554:Courage, and onward! Citizens, whither are we going? To science made
tests/les_miserables.txt:59555:government, to the force of things become the sole public force, to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59556:natural law, having in itself its sanction and its penalty and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59557:promulgating itself by evidence, to a dawn of truth corresponding to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59558:dawn of day. We are advancing to the union of peoples; we are advancing
tests/les_miserables.txt:59559:to the unity of man. No more fictions; no more parasites. The real
tests/les_miserables.txt:59561:assizes at the summit of Europe, and, later on, at the centre of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59562:continents, in a grand parliament of the intelligence. Something
tests/les_miserables.txt:59563:similar has already been seen. The amphictyons had two sittings a year,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59564:one at Delphos the seat of the gods, the other at Thermopylæ, the place
tests/les_miserables.txt:59565:of heroes. Europe will have her amphictyons; the globe will have its
tests/les_miserables.txt:59566:amphictyons. France bears this sublime future in her breast. This is
tests/les_miserables.txt:59567:the gestation of the nineteenth century. That which Greece sketched out
tests/les_miserables.txt:59568:is worthy of being finished by France. Listen to me, you, Feuilly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59569:valiant artisan, man of the people. I revere you. Yes, you clearly
tests/les_miserables.txt:59574:through our victory, it is a revolution that we are about to create. As
tests/les_miserables.txt:59575:conflagrations light up a whole city, so revolutions illuminate the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59576:whole human race. And what is the revolution that we shall cause? I
tests/les_miserables.txt:59577:have just told you, the Revolution of the True. From a political point
tests/les_miserables.txt:59578:of view, there is but a single principle; the sovereignty of man over
tests/les_miserables.txt:59579:himself. This sovereignty of myself over myself is called Liberty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59580:Where two or three of these sovereignties are combined, the state
tests/les_miserables.txt:59581:begins. But in that association there is no abdication. Each
tests/les_miserables.txt:59582:sovereignty concedes a certain quantity of itself, for the purpose of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59583:forming the common right. This quantity is the same for all of us. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:59584:identity of concession which each makes to all, is called Equality.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59585:Common right is nothing else than the protection of all beaming on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59586:right of each. This protection of all over each is called Fraternity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59587:The point of intersection of all these assembled sovereignties is
tests/les_miserables.txt:59588:called society. This intersection being a junction, this point is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59589:knot. Hence what is called the social bond. Some say social contract;
tests/les_miserables.txt:59590:which is the same thing, the word contract being etymologically formed
tests/les_miserables.txt:59591:with the idea of a bond. Let us come to an understanding about
tests/les_miserables.txt:59593:Equality, citizens, is not wholly a surface vegetation, a society of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59594:great blades of grass and tiny oaks; a proximity of jealousies which
tests/les_miserables.txt:59595:render each other null and void; legally speaking, it is all aptitudes
tests/les_miserables.txt:59596:possessed of the same opportunity; politically, it is all votes
tests/les_miserables.txt:59597:possessed of the same weight; religiously, it is all consciences
tests/les_miserables.txt:59599:obligatory instruction. The right to the alphabet, that is where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59600:beginning must be made. The primary school imposed on all, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59601:secondary school offered to all, that is the law. From an identical
tests/les_miserables.txt:59602:school, an identical society will spring. Yes, instruction! light!
tests/les_miserables.txt:59603:light! everything comes from light, and to it everything returns.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59604:Citizens, the nineteenth century is great, but the twentieth century
tests/les_miserables.txt:59606:old, we shall no longer, as to-day, have to fear a conquest, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:59608:interruption of civilization depending on a marriage of kings, on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59609:birth in hereditary tyrannies, a partition of peoples by a congress, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59610:dismemberment because of the failure of a dynasty, a combat of two
tests/les_miserables.txt:59611:religions meeting face to face, like two bucks in the dark, on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59614:work and the scaffold and the sword, and battles and the ruffianism of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59615:chance in the forest of events. One might almost say: There will be no
tests/les_miserables.txt:59616:more events. We shall be happy. The human race will accomplish its law,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59617:as the terrestrial globe accomplishes its law; harmony will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:59620:hour in which I am addressing you, is a gloomy hour; but these are
tests/les_miserables.txt:59621:terrible purchases of the future. A revolution is a toll. Oh! the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:59622:race will be delivered, raised up, consoled! We affirm it on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:59623:barrier. Whence should proceed that cry of love, if not from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59624:heights of sacrifice? Oh my brothers, this is the point of junction, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59625:those who think and of those who suffer; this barricade is not made of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59628:ideal. The day embraces the night, and says to it: ‘I am about to die,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59629:and thou shalt be born again with me.’ From the embrace of all
tests/les_miserables.txt:59632:join and constitute our death. Brothers, he who dies here dies in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59633:radiance of the future, and we are entering a tomb all flooded with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59637:Enjolras paused rather than became silent; his lips continued to move
tests/les_miserables.txt:59638:silently, as though he were talking to himself, which caused them all
tests/les_miserables.txt:59640:applause; but they whispered together for a long time. Speech being a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59641:breath, the rustling of intelligences resembles the rustling of leaves.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59651:Let the reader recall the state of his soul. We have just recalled it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59654:wings which are spread over those in the death agony. He felt that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:59656:side of the wall, and he no longer beheld the faces of the living
tests/les_miserables.txt:59657:except with the eyes of one dead.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59659:How did M. Fauchelevent come there? Why was he there? What had he come
tests/les_miserables.txt:59661:Besides, since our despair has this peculiarity, that it envelops
tests/les_miserables.txt:59662:others as well as ourselves, it seemed logical to him that all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59663:world should come thither to die.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59667:However, M. Fauchelevent did not speak to him, did not look at him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59668:had not even the air of hearing him, when Marius raised his voice to
tests/les_miserables.txt:59672:As far as Marius was concerned, this attitude of M. Fauchelevent was
tests/les_miserables.txt:59673:comforting, and, if such a word can be used for such impressions, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:59675:impossibility of addressing that enigmatical man, who was, in his eyes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59676:both equivocal and imposing. Moreover, it had been a long time since he
tests/les_miserables.txt:59680:The five chosen men left the barricade by way of Mondétour lane; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:59681:bore a perfect resemblance to members of the National Guard. One of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59682:them wept as he took his leave. Before setting out, they embraced those
tests/les_miserables.txt:59685:When the five men sent back to life had taken their departure, Enjolras
tests/les_miserables.txt:59686:thought of the man who had been condemned to death.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59696:“Wait. We need all our cartridges just at present.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59706:“I am uncomfortable against this post,” replied Javert. “You are not
tests/les_miserables.txt:59711:And with a motion of the head, he indicated the body of M. Mabeuf.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59714:of the room, on which they had been running bullets and making
tests/les_miserables.txt:59715:cartridges. All the cartridges having been made, and all the powder
tests/les_miserables.txt:59718:At Enjolras’ command, four insurgents unbound Javert from the post.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59721:Leaving his arms tied behind his back, they placed about his feet a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59722:slender but stout whip-cord, as is done to men on the point of mounting
tests/les_miserables.txt:59723:the scaffold, which allowed him to take steps about fifteen inches in
tests/les_miserables.txt:59725:they laid him down, closely bound about the middle of the body.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59727:By way of further security, and by means of a rope fastened to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:59728:neck, they added to the system of ligatures which rendered every
tests/les_miserables.txt:59729:attempt at escape impossible, that sort of bond which is called in
tests/les_miserables.txt:59730:prisons a martingale, which, starting at the neck, forks on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59731:stomach, and meets the hands, after passing between the legs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59734:surveying him with singular attention. The shadow cast by this man made
tests/les_miserables.txt:59735:Javert turn his head. He raised his eyes, and recognized Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59736:He did not even start, but dropped his lids proudly and confined
tests/les_miserables.txt:59737:himself to the remark: “It is perfectly simple.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59746:The daylight was increasing rapidly. Not a window was opened, not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59748:Rue de la Chanvrerie, opposite the barricade, had been evacuated by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59752:crossroads, which gleamed white in the light of the sun. Nothing is so
tests/les_miserables.txt:59755:a certain distance. It was evident that the critical moment was
tests/les_miserables.txt:59756:approaching. As on the previous evening, the sentinels had come in; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:59757:this time all had come.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59759:The barricade was stronger than on the occasion of the first attack.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59760:Since the departure of the five, they had increased its height still
tests/les_miserables.txt:59763:On the advice of the sentinel who had examined the region of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59764:Halles, Enjolras, for fear of a surprise in the rear, came to a serious
tests/les_miserables.txt:59765:decision. He had the small gut of the Mondétour lane, which had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:59766:left open up to that time, barricaded. For this purpose, they tore up
tests/les_miserables.txt:59768:barricade, walled on three streets, in front on the Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:59773:Courfeyrac with a laugh.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59775:Enjolras had about thirty paving-stones “torn up in excess,” said
tests/les_miserables.txt:59778:The silence was now so profound in the quarter whence the attack must
tests/les_miserables.txt:59779:needs come, that Enjolras had each man resume his post of battle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59781:An allowance of brandy was doled out to each.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59783:Nothing is more curious than a barricade preparing for an assault. Each
tests/les_miserables.txt:59784:man selects his place as though at the theatre. They jostle, and elbow
tests/les_miserables.txt:59785:and crowd each other. There are some who make stalls of paving-stones.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59786:Here is a corner of the wall which is in the way, it is removed; here
tests/les_miserables.txt:59787:is a redan which may afford protection, they take shelter behind it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59788:Left-handed men are precious; they take the places that are
tests/les_miserables.txt:59789:inconvenient to the rest. Many arrange to fight in a sitting posture.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59790:They wish to be at ease to kill, and to die comfortably. In the sad war
tests/les_miserables.txt:59792:firing from the top of a terrace upon a roof, had a reclining-chair
tests/les_miserables.txt:59793:brought there for his use; a charge of grape-shot found him out there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59795:As soon as the leader has given the order to clear the decks for
tests/les_miserables.txt:59796:action, all disorderly movements cease; there is no more pulling from
tests/les_miserables.txt:59797:one another; there are no more coteries; no more asides, there is no
tests/les_miserables.txt:59798:more holding aloof; everything in their spirits converges in, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:59799:changes into, a waiting for the assailants. A barricade before the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59800:arrival of danger is chaos; in danger, it is discipline itself. Peril
tests/les_miserables.txt:59801:produces order.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59804:placed himself in a sort of embrasure which he had reserved for
tests/les_miserables.txt:59805:himself, all the rest held their peace. A series of faint, sharp noises
tests/les_miserables.txt:59806:resounded confusedly along the wall of paving-stones. It was the men
tests/les_miserables.txt:59807:cocking their guns.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59809:Moreover, their attitudes were prouder, more confident than ever; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59810:excess of sacrifice strengthens; they no longer cherished any hope, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:59811:they had despair, despair,—the last weapon, which sometimes gives
tests/les_miserables.txt:59812:victory; Virgil has said so. Supreme resources spring from extreme
tests/les_miserables.txt:59813:resolutions. To embark in death is sometimes the means of escaping a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59814:shipwreck; and the lid of the coffin becomes a plank of safety.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59816:As on the preceding evening, the attention of all was directed, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:59820:They had not long to wait. A stir began distinctly in the Saint-Leu
tests/les_miserables.txt:59821:quarter, but it did not resemble the movement of the first attack. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:59822:clashing of chains, the uneasy jolting of a mass, the click of brass
tests/les_miserables.txt:59823:skipping along the pavement, a sort of solemn uproar, announced that
tests/les_miserables.txt:59824:some sinister construction of iron was approaching. There arose a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59825:tremor in the bosoms of these peaceful old streets, pierced and built
tests/les_miserables.txt:59826:for the fertile circulation of interests and ideas, and which are not
tests/les_miserables.txt:59829:The fixity of eye in all the combatants upon the extremity of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59830:street became ferocious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59832:A cannon made its appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59834:Artillery-men were pushing the piece; it was in firing trim; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59835:fore-carriage had been detached; two upheld the gun-carriage, four were
tests/les_miserables.txt:59836:at the wheels; others followed with the caisson. They could see the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59837:smoke of the burning lint-stock.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59841:The whole barricade fired, the report was terrible; an avalanche of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59842:smoke covered and effaced both cannon and men; after a few seconds, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59843:cloud dispersed, and the cannon and men reappeared; the gun-crew had
tests/les_miserables.txt:59844:just finished rolling it slowly, correctly, without haste, into
tests/les_miserables.txt:59845:position facing the barricade. Not one of them had been struck. Then
tests/les_miserables.txt:59846:the captain of the piece, bearing down upon the breech in order to
tests/les_miserables.txt:59847:raise the muzzle, began to point the cannon with the gravity of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:59848:astronomer levelling a telescope.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59850:“Bravo for the cannoneers!” cried Bossuet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59852:And the whole barricade clapped their hands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59855:astride of the gutter, the piece was ready for action. A formidable
tests/les_miserables.txt:59856:pair of jaws yawned on the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59858:“Come, merrily now!” ejaculated Courfeyrac. “That’s the brutal part of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59860:reaching out its big paw to us. The barricade is going to be severely
tests/les_miserables.txt:59861:shaken up. The fusillade tries, the cannon takes.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59864:“It is a piece of eight, new model, brass,” added Combeferre. “Those
tests/les_miserables.txt:59865:pieces are liable to burst as soon as the proportion of ten parts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59866:tin to one hundred of brass is exceeded. The excess of tin renders them
tests/les_miserables.txt:59867:too tender. Then it comes to pass that they have caves and chambers
tests/les_miserables.txt:59869:to render it possible to force the charge, it may become necessary to
tests/les_miserables.txt:59870:return to the process of the fourteenth century, hooping, and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:59871:encircle the piece on the outside with a series of unwelded steel
tests/les_miserables.txt:59872:bands, from the breech to the trunnions. In the meantime, they remedy
tests/les_miserables.txt:59873:this defect as best they may; they manage to discover where the holes
tests/les_miserables.txt:59874:are located in the vent of a cannon, by means of a searcher. But there
tests/les_miserables.txt:59878:“In the sixteenth century,” remarked Bossuet, “they used to rifle
tests/les_miserables.txt:59879:cannon.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59882:“Yes,” replied Combeferre, “that augments the projectile force, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:59883:diminishes the accuracy of the firing. In firing at short range, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59884:trajectory is not as rigid as could be desired, the parabola is
tests/les_miserables.txt:59885:exaggerated, the line of the projectile is no longer sufficiently
tests/les_miserables.txt:59886:rectilinear to allow of its striking intervening objects, which is,
tests/les_miserables.txt:59887:nevertheless, a necessity of battle, the importance of which increases
tests/les_miserables.txt:59888:with the proximity of the enemy and the precipitation of the discharge.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59889:This defect of the tension of the curve of the projectile in the rifled
tests/les_miserables.txt:59890:cannon of the sixteenth century arose from the smallness of the charge;
tests/les_miserables.txt:59891:small charges for that sort of engine are imposed by the ballistic
tests/les_miserables.txt:59892:necessities, such, for instance, as the preservation of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59893:gun-carriage. In short, that despot, the cannon, cannot do all that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:59894:desires; force is a great weakness. A cannon-ball only travels six
tests/les_miserables.txt:59896:second. Such is the superiority of Jesus Christ over Napoleon.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59901:How was the casing of the barricade going to behave under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59902:cannon-balls? Would they effect a breach? That was the question. While
tests/les_miserables.txt:59904:loading the cannon.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59910:“Present!” shouted a joyous voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59912:And Gavroche flung himself into the barricade just as the ball dashed
tests/les_miserables.txt:59915:He came from the direction of the Rue du Cygne, and he had nimbly
tests/les_miserables.txt:59916:climbed over the auxiliary barricade which fronted on the labyrinth of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59919:Gavroche produced a greater sensation in the barricade than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59920:cannon-ball.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59923:omnibus wheel broken, and the old Anceau cart was demolished. On seeing
tests/les_miserables.txt:59924:this, the barricade burst into a laugh.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59934:They flocked round Gavroche. But he had no time to tell anything.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59940:“Hullo!” said the child, “what are you doing here yourself?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59943:And he stared at Marius intently with his epic effrontery. His eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:59946:It was with an accent of severity that Marius continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:59948:“Who told you to come back? Did you deliver my letter at the address?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59951:Gavroche was not without some compunctions in the matter of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:59952:letter. In his haste to return to the barricade, he had got rid of it
tests/les_miserables.txt:59953:rather than delivered it. He was forced to acknowledge to himself that
tests/les_miserables.txt:59954:he had confided it rather lightly to that stranger whose face he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:59956:that was not sufficient. In short, he had been administering to himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:59957:little inward remonstrances and he feared Marius’ reproaches. In order
tests/les_miserables.txt:59958:to extricate himself from the predicament, he took the simplest course;
tests/les_miserables.txt:59965:Marius had had two objects in sending that letter: to bid farewell to
tests/les_miserables.txt:59966:Cosette and to save Gavroche. He was obliged to content himself with
tests/les_miserables.txt:59969:The despatch of his letter and the presence of M. Fauchelevent in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59970:barricade, was a coincidence which occurred to him. He pointed out M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59971:Fauchelevent to Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59976:“No,” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59978:Gavroche had, in fact, as we have just mentioned, seen Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:59981:The troubled and unhealthy conjectures which had outlined themselves in
tests/les_miserables.txt:59982:Marius’ mind were dissipated. Did he know M. Fauchelevent’s opinions?
tests/les_miserables.txt:59983:Perhaps M. Fauchelevent was a republican. Hence his very natural
tests/les_miserables.txt:59984:presence in this combat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59986:In the meanwhile, Gavroche was shouting, at the other end of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59987:barricade: “My gun!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:59990:Courfeyrac had it returned to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59992:Gavroche warned “his comrades” as he called them, that the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:59993:was blocked. He had had great difficulty in reaching it. A battalion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:59995:on the watch on the side of the Rue du Cygne; on the opposite side, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:59996:municipal guard occupied the Rue des Prêcheurs. The bulk of the army
tests/les_miserables.txt:59997:was facing them in front.
tests/les_miserables.txt:59999:This information given, Gavroche added:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60001:“I authorize you to hit ’em a tremendous whack.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60004:Meanwhile, Enjolras was straining his ears and watching at his
tests/les_miserables.txt:60010:A company of infantry of the line had come up and occupied the end of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60011:the street behind the piece of ordnance. The soldiers were tearing up
tests/les_miserables.txt:60012:the pavement and constructing with the stones a small, low wall, a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:60013:of side-work not more than eighteen inches high, and facing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60014:barricade. In the angle at the left of this epaulement, there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:60015:visible the head of the column of a battalion from the suburbs massed
tests/les_miserables.txt:60018:Enjolras, on the watch, thought he distinguished the peculiar sound
tests/les_miserables.txt:60019:which is produced when the shells of grape-shot are drawn from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60020:caissons, and he saw the commander of the piece change the elevation
tests/les_miserables.txt:60021:and incline the mouth of the cannon slightly to the left. Then the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60022:cannoneers began to load the piece. The chief seized the lint-stock
tests/les_miserables.txt:60026:your knees along the barricade!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60030:had quitted their posts of combat on Gavroche’s arrival, rushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:60031:pell-mell towards the barricade; but before Enjolras’ order could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:60032:executed, the discharge took place with the terrifying rattle of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60033:round of grape-shot. This is what it was, in fact.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60035:The charge had been aimed at the cut in the redoubt, and had there
tests/les_miserables.txt:60036:rebounded from the wall; and this terrible rebound had produced two
tests/les_miserables.txt:60039:If this were continued, the barricade was no longer tenable. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:60042:A murmur of consternation arose.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60044:“Let us prevent the second discharge,” said Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60046:And, lowering his rifle, he took aim at the captain of the gun, who, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:60047:that moment, was bearing down on the breach of his gun and rectifying
tests/les_miserables.txt:60050:The captain of the piece was a handsome sergeant of artillery, very
tests/les_miserables.txt:60051:young, blond, with a very gentle face, and the intelligent air peculiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:60052:to that predestined and redoubtable weapon which, by dint of perfecting
tests/les_miserables.txt:60055:Combeferre, who was standing beside Enjolras, scrutinized this young
tests/les_miserables.txt:60058:“What a pity!” said Combeferre. “What hideous things these butcheries
tests/les_miserables.txt:60061:him. Fancy, he is a charming young man; he is intrepid; it is evident
tests/les_miserables.txt:60063:educated; he has a father, a mother, a family; he is probably in love;
tests/les_miserables.txt:60076:And a tear trickled slowly down Enjolras’ marble cheek.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60079:leaped forth. The artillery-man turned round twice, his arms extended
tests/les_miserables.txt:60081:with his side on the gun, and lay there motionless. They could see his
tests/les_miserables.txt:60082:back, from the centre of which there flowed directly a stream of blood.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60085:He had to be carried away and replaced by another. Several minutes were
tests/les_miserables.txt:60086:thus gained, in fact.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60095:Opinions were exchanged in the barricade. The firing from the gun was
tests/les_miserables.txt:60096:about to begin again. Against that grape-shot, they could not hold out
tests/les_miserables.txt:60097:a quarter of an hour longer. It was absolutely necessary to deaden the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60100:Enjolras issued this command:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60102:“We must place a mattress there.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60108:Jean Valjean, who was seated apart on a stone post, at the corner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60111:the combatants saying around him: “Here is a gun that is doing
tests/les_miserables.txt:60118:la Chanvrerie, an old woman, foreseeing the bullets, had placed her
tests/les_miserables.txt:60119:mattress in front of her window. This window, an attic window, was on
tests/les_miserables.txt:60120:the roof of a six-story house situated a little beyond the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60121:The mattress, placed cross-wise, supported at the bottom on two poles
tests/les_miserables.txt:60122:for drying linen, was upheld at the top by two ropes, which, at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:60123:distance, looked like two threads, and which were attached to two nails
tests/les_miserables.txt:60124:planted in the window frames. These ropes were distinctly visible, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:60131:Jean Valjean took aim at the attic window and fired.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60133:One of the mattress ropes was cut.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60137:Jean Valjean fired the second charge. The second rope lashed the panes
tests/les_miserables.txt:60138:of the attic window. The mattress slipped between the two poles and
tests/les_miserables.txt:60141:The barricade applauded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60143:All voices cried:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60148:“Yes,” said Combeferre, “but who will go and fetch it?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60151:The mattress had, in fact, fallen outside the barricade, between
tests/les_miserables.txt:60154:been lying flat on their stomachs behind the line of paving-stones
tests/les_miserables.txt:60155:which they had erected, and, in order to supply the forced silence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60156:the piece, which was quiet while its service was in course of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60157:reorganization, they had opened fire on the barricade. The insurgents
tests/les_miserables.txt:60159:fusillade broke against the barricade; but the street, which it filled,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60162:Jean Valjean stepped out of the cut, entered the street, traversed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60163:storm of bullets, walked up to the mattress, hoisted it upon his back,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60164:and returned to the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60166:He placed the mattress in the cut with his own hands. He fixed it there
tests/les_miserables.txt:60167:against the wall in such a manner that the artillery-men should not see
tests/les_miserables.txt:60170:That done, they awaited the next discharge of grape-shot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60172:It was not long in coming.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60174:The cannon vomited forth its package of buckshot with a roar. But there
tests/les_miserables.txt:60175:was no rebound. The effect which they had foreseen had been attained.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60176:The barricade was saved.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60178:“Citizen,” said Enjolras to Jean Valjean, “the Republic thanks you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60181:Bossuet admired and laughed. He exclaimed:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60183:“It is immoral that a mattress should have so much power. Triumph of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60184:that which yields over that which strikes with lightning. But never
tests/les_miserables.txt:60185:mind, glory to the mattress which annuls a cannon!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60196:Her chamber was narrow, neat, unobtrusive, with a long sash-window,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60197:facing the East on the back court-yard of the house.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60200:there on the preceding evening, and she had already retired to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:60201:chamber when Toussaint had said:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60207:dreams, which possibly arose from the fact that her little bed was very
tests/les_miserables.txt:60209:awoke with the sun in her eyes, which, at first, produced on her the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60210:effect of being a continuation of her dream. Her first thought on
tests/les_miserables.txt:60213:previously, passed through that reaction of the soul which absolutely
tests/les_miserables.txt:60214:will not hear of unhappiness. She began to cherish hope, with all her
tests/les_miserables.txt:60216:three days since she had seen Marius. But she said to herself that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:60217:must have received her letter, that he knew where she was, and that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:60218:was so clever that he would find means of reaching her.—And that
tests/les_miserables.txt:60219:certainly to-day, and perhaps that very morning.—It was broad daylight,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60221:very early, but that she must rise, nevertheless, in order to receive
tests/les_miserables.txt:60224:She felt that she could not live without Marius, and that,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60225:consequently, that was sufficient and that Marius would come. No
tests/les_miserables.txt:60226:objection was valid. All this was certain. It was monstrous enough
tests/les_miserables.txt:60228:was horrible on the part of the good God. Now, this cruel teasing from
tests/les_miserables.txt:60230:would bring good news. Youth is made thus; it quickly dries its eyes;
tests/les_miserables.txt:60231:it finds sorrow useless and does not accept it. Youth is the smile of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60232:the future in the presence of an unknown quantity, which is itself. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:60236:Moreover, Cosette could not remember what Marius had said to her on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60237:subject of this absence which was to last only one day, and what
tests/les_miserables.txt:60238:explanation of it he had given her. Every one has noticed with what
tests/les_miserables.txt:60239:nimbleness a coin which one has dropped on the ground rolls away and
tests/les_miserables.txt:60240:hides, and with what art it renders itself undiscoverable. There are
tests/les_miserables.txt:60241:thoughts which play us the same trick; they nestle away in a corner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60245:naughty and very wicked of her, to have forgotten the words uttered by
tests/les_miserables.txt:60248:She sprang out of bed and accomplished the two ablutions of soul and
tests/les_miserables.txt:60251:One may, in a case of exigency, introduce the reader into a nuptial
tests/les_miserables.txt:60252:chamber, not into a virginal chamber. Verse would hardly venture it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60256:whiteness in the dark, it is the private cell of a closed lily, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:60258:Woman in the bud is sacred. That innocent bud which opens, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:60259:adorable half-nudity which is afraid of itself, that white foot which
tests/les_miserables.txt:60260:takes refuge in a slipper, that throat which veils itself before a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60261:mirror as though a mirror were an eye, that chemise which makes haste
tests/les_miserables.txt:60262:to rise up and conceal the shoulder for a creaking bit of furniture or
tests/les_miserables.txt:60263:a passing vehicle, those cords tied, those clasps fastened, those laces
tests/les_miserables.txt:60264:drawn, those tremors, those shivers of cold and modesty, that exquisite
tests/les_miserables.txt:60266:is no cause for alarm, the successive phases of dressing, as charming
tests/les_miserables.txt:60267:as the clouds of dawn,—it is not fitting that all this should be
tests/les_miserables.txt:60268:narrated, and it is too much to have even called attention to it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60270:The eye of man must be more religious in the presence of the rising of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60271:a young girl than in the presence of the rising of a star. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:60272:possibility of hurting should inspire an augmentation of respect. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:60273:down on the peach, the bloom on the plum, the radiated crystal of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60274:snow, the wing of the butterfly powdered with feathers, are coarse
tests/les_miserables.txt:60275:compared to that chastity which does not even know that it is chaste.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60277:Her bed-chamber is hidden in the sombre part of the ideal. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:60278:indiscreet touch of a glance brutalizes this vague penumbra. Here,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60279:contemplation is profanation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60286:turned crimson. We are of the number who fall speechless in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60287:presence of young girls and flowers, since we think them worthy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60290:Cosette dressed herself very hastily, combed and dressed her hair,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60291:which was a very simple matter in those days, when women did not swell
tests/les_miserables.txt:60292:out their curls and bands with cushions and puffs, and did not put
tests/les_miserables.txt:60293:crinoline in their locks. Then she opened the window and cast her eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:60294:around her in every direction, hoping to descry some bit of the street,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60296:to watch for Marius there. But no view of the outside was to be had.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60297:The back court was surrounded by tolerably high walls, and the outlook
tests/les_miserables.txt:60298:was only on several gardens. Cosette pronounced these gardens hideous:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60300:scrap of the gutter of the street would have met her wishes better. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:60301:decided to gaze at the sky, as though she thought that Marius might
tests/les_miserables.txt:60302:come from that quarter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60304:All at once, she burst into tears. Not that this was fickleness of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60305:soul; but hopes cut in twain by dejection—that was her case. She had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60306:confused consciousness of something horrible. Thoughts were rife in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60307:air, in fact. She told herself that she was not sure of anything, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:60309:could return to her from heaven appeared to her no longer charming but
tests/les_miserables.txt:60312:Then, as is the nature of these clouds, calm returned to her, and hope
tests/les_miserables.txt:60313:and a sort of unconscious smile, which yet indicated trust in God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60315:Every one in the house was still asleep. A country-like silence
tests/les_miserables.txt:60316:reigned. Not a shutter had been opened. The porter’s lodge was closed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60318:father was asleep. She must have suffered much, and she must have still
tests/les_miserables.txt:60320:been unkind; but she counted on Marius. The eclipse of such a light was
tests/les_miserables.txt:60321:decidedly impossible. Now and then, she heard sharp shocks in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60322:distance, and she said: “It is odd that people should be opening and
tests/les_miserables.txt:60323:shutting their carriage gates so early.” They were the reports of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60324:cannon battering the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60326:A few feet below Cosette’s window, in the ancient and perfectly black
tests/les_miserables.txt:60327:cornice of the wall, there was a martin’s nest; the curve of this nest
tests/les_miserables.txt:60328:formed a little projection beyond the cornice, so that from above it
tests/les_miserables.txt:60331:about, flew away, then came back, bearing in his beak food and kisses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60335:absorbed in chimæras, illuminated by love within and by the dawn
tests/les_miserables.txt:60336:without, bent over mechanically, and almost without daring to avow to
tests/les_miserables.txt:60339:and her little ones, with the profound trouble which a nest produces on
tests/les_miserables.txt:60348:The assailants’ fire continued. Musketry and grape-shot alternated, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:60349:without committing great ravages, to tell the truth. The top alone of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60351:attic window in the roof, riddled with buckshot and biscaïens, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:60352:slowly losing their shape. The combatants who had been posted there had
tests/les_miserables.txt:60353:been obliged to withdraw. However, this is according to the tactics of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60354:barricades; to fire for a long while, in order to exhaust the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60355:insurgents’ ammunition, if they commit the mistake of replying. When it
tests/les_miserables.txt:60356:is perceived, from the slackening of their fire, that they have no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:60358:trap; the barricade did not reply.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60360:At every discharge by platoons, Gavroche puffed out his cheek with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:60363:“Good for you,” said he, “rip up the cloth. We want some lint.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60366:Courfeyrac called the grape-shot to order for the little effect which
tests/les_miserables.txt:60367:it produced, and said to the cannon:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60373:silence on the part of the redoubt began to render the besiegers
tests/les_miserables.txt:60374:uneasy, and to make them fear some unexpected incident, and that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:60375:felt the necessity of getting a clear view behind that heap of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60377:wall which received blows without retorting. The insurgents suddenly
tests/les_miserables.txt:60378:perceived a helmet glittering in the sun on a neighboring roof. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:60379:fireman had placed his back against a tall chimney, and seemed to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:60380:acting as sentinel. His glance fell directly down into the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60382:“There’s an embarrassing watcher,” said Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60386:Without saying a word, he took aim at the fireman, and, a second later,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60388:terrified soldier made haste to disappear. A second observer took his
tests/les_miserables.txt:60389:place. This one was an officer. Jean Valjean, who had re-loaded his
tests/les_miserables.txt:60390:gun, took aim at the newcomer and sent the officer’s casque to join the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60391:soldier’s. The officer did not persist, and retired speedily. This time
tests/les_miserables.txt:60392:the warning was understood. No one made his appearance thereafter on
tests/les_miserables.txt:60393:that roof; and the idea of spying on the barricade was abandoned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60412:Those who have preserved some memory of this already distant epoch know
tests/les_miserables.txt:60414:insurrections. It was particularly zealous and intrepid in the days of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60415:June, 1832. A certain good dram-shop keeper of Pantin des Vertus or la
tests/les_miserables.txt:60416:Cunette, whose “establishment” had been closed by the riots, became
tests/les_miserables.txt:60417:leonine at the sight of his deserted dance-hall, and got himself killed
tests/les_miserables.txt:60419:and heroic time, in the presence of ideas which had their knights,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60421:detracted nothing from the bravery of the movement. The diminution of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60422:pile of crowns made bankers sing the Marseillaise. They shed their
tests/les_miserables.txt:60423:blood lyrically for the counting-house; and they defended the shop,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60424:that immense diminutive of the fatherland, with Lacedæmonian
tests/les_miserables.txt:60428:extremely serious. It was social elements entering into strife, while
tests/les_miserables.txt:60431:Another sign of the times was the anarchy mingled with governmentalism
tests/les_miserables.txt:60432:[the barbarous name of the correct party]. People were for order in
tests/les_miserables.txt:60433:combination with lack of discipline.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60435:The drum suddenly beat capricious calls, at the command of such or such
tests/les_miserables.txt:60436:a Colonel of the National Guard; such and such a captain went into
tests/les_miserables.txt:60437:action through inspiration; such and such National Guardsmen fought,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60438:“for an idea,” and on their own account. At critical moments, on “days”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60439:they took counsel less of their leaders than of their instincts. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:60441:like Fannicot, others of the pen, like Henri Fonfrède.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60443:Civilization, unfortunately, represented at this epoch rather by an
tests/les_miserables.txt:60444:aggregation of interests than by a group of principles, was or thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:60445:itself, in peril; it set up the cry of alarm; each, constituting
tests/les_miserables.txt:60446:himself a centre, defended it, succored it, and protected it with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:60447:own head; and the first comer took it upon himself to save society.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60449:Zeal sometimes proceeded to extermination. A platoon of the National
tests/les_miserables.txt:60450:Guard would constitute itself on its own authority a private council of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60451:war, and judge and execute a captured insurgent in five minutes. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:60452:an improvisation of this sort that had slain Jean Prouvaire. Fierce
tests/les_miserables.txt:60453:Lynch law, with which no one party had any right to reproach the rest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60454:for it has been applied by the Republic in America, as well as by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60455:monarchy in Europe. This Lynch law was complicated with mistakes. On
tests/les_miserables.txt:60457:in the Place Royale, with a bayonet at his loins, and only escaped by
tests/les_miserables.txt:60458:taking refuge under the porte-cochère of No. 6. They shouted:—“There’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:60460:had under his arm a volume of the memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:60465:On the 6th of June, 1832, a company of the National Guards from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60466:suburbs, commanded by the Captain Fannicot, above mentioned, had itself
tests/les_miserables.txt:60467:decimated in the Rue de la Chanvrerie out of caprice and its own good
tests/les_miserables.txt:60468:pleasure. This fact, singular though it may seem, was proved at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60469:judicial investigation opened in consequence of the insurrection of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60470:1832. Captain Fannicot, a bold and impatient bourgeois, a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60471:condottiere of the order of those whom we have just characterized, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60472:fanatical and intractable governmentalist, could not resist the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60473:temptation to fire prematurely, and the ambition of capturing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60474:barricade alone and unaided, that is to say, with his company.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60475:Exasperated by the successive apparition of the red flag and the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:60476:coat which he took for the black flag, he loudly blamed the generals
tests/les_miserables.txt:60477:and chiefs of the corps, who were holding council and did not think
tests/les_miserables.txt:60478:that the moment for the decisive assault had arrived, and who were
tests/les_miserables.txt:60479:allowing “the insurrection to fry in its own fat,” to use the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60480:celebrated expression of one of them. For his part, he thought the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60481:barricade ripe, and as that which is ripe ought to fall, he made the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60484:He commanded men as resolute as himself, “raging fellows,” as a witness
tests/les_miserables.txt:60485:said. His company, the same which had shot Jean Prouvaire the poet, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:60487:moment when they were least expecting it, the captain launched his men
tests/les_miserables.txt:60488:against the barricade. This movement, executed with more good will than
tests/les_miserables.txt:60489:strategy, cost the Fannicot company dear. Before it had traversed two
tests/les_miserables.txt:60490:thirds of the street it was received by a general discharge from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60491:barricade. Four, the most audacious, who were running on in front, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:60493:courageous throng of National Guards, very brave men but lacking in
tests/les_miserables.txt:60494:military tenacity, were forced to fall back, after some hesitation,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60495:leaving fifteen corpses on the pavement. This momentary hesitation gave
tests/les_miserables.txt:60496:the insurgents time to re-load their weapons, and a second and very
tests/les_miserables.txt:60497:destructive discharge struck the company before it could regain the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60498:corner of the street, its shelter. A moment more, and it was caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:60499:between two fires, and it received the volley from the battery piece
tests/les_miserables.txt:60500:which, not having received the order, had not discontinued its firing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60502:The intrepid and imprudent Fannicot was one of the dead from this
tests/les_miserables.txt:60503:grape-shot. He was killed by the cannon, that is to say, by order.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60505:This attack, which was more furious than serious, irritated
tests/les_miserables.txt:60510:Enjolras spoke like the real general of insurrection which he was.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60511:Insurrection and repression do not fight with equal weapons.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60512:Insurrection, which is speedily exhausted, has only a certain number of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60513:shots to fire and a certain number of combatants to expend. An empty
tests/les_miserables.txt:60514:cartridge-box, a man killed, cannot be replaced. As repression has the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60515:army, it does not count its men, and, as it has Vincennes, it does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:60516:count its shots. Repression has as many regiments as the barricade has
tests/les_miserables.txt:60517:men, and as many arsenals as the barricade has cartridge-boxes. Thus
tests/les_miserables.txt:60518:they are struggles of one against a hundred, which always end in
tests/les_miserables.txt:60519:crushing the barricade; unless the revolution, uprising suddenly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60520:flings into the balance its flaming archangel’s sword. This does happen
tests/les_miserables.txt:60524:air, a wonderful light appears, the yawning maw of force draws back,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60525:and the army, that lion, sees before it, erect and tranquil, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:60526:prophet, France.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60534:In the chaos of sentiments and passions which defend a barricade, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:60536:enthusiasm, the ideal, conviction, the rage of the gambler, and, above
tests/les_miserables.txt:60537:all, intermittences of hope.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60539:One of these intermittences, one of these vague quivers of hope
tests/les_miserables.txt:60540:suddenly traversed the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60541:moment when it was least expected.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60543:“Listen,” suddenly cried Enjolras, who was still on the watch, “it
tests/les_miserables.txt:60547:It is certain that, on the morning of the 6th of June, the insurrection
tests/les_miserables.txt:60548:broke out afresh for an hour or two, to a certain extent. The obstinacy
tests/les_miserables.txt:60549:of the alarm peal of Saint-Merry reanimated some fancies. Barricades
tests/les_miserables.txt:60551:of the Porte Saint-Martin, a young man, armed with a rifle, attacked
tests/les_miserables.txt:60552:alone a squadron of cavalry. In plain sight, on the open boulevard, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:60553:placed one knee on the ground, shouldered his weapon, fired, killed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60554:commander of the squadron, and turned away, saying: “There’s another
tests/les_miserables.txt:60560:could be seen to tremble at every shot. A child fourteen years of age
tests/les_miserables.txt:60561:was arrested in the Rue de la Cossonerie, with his pockets full of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60562:cartridges. Many posts were attacked. At the entrance to the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:60563:Bertin-Poirée, a very lively and utterly unexpected fusillade welcomed
tests/les_miserables.txt:60564:a regiment of cuirrassiers, at whose head marched Marshal General
tests/les_miserables.txt:60565:Cavaignac de Barague. In the Rue Planche-Mibray, they threw old pieces
tests/les_miserables.txt:60568:Napoleon’s old lieutenant grew thoughtful, as he recalled Suchet’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:60570:de chambre on our heads.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60573:These general symptoms which presented themselves at the moment when it
tests/les_miserables.txt:60574:was thought that the uprising had been rendered local, this fever of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60575:wrath, these sparks which flew hither and thither above those deep
tests/les_miserables.txt:60576:masses of combustibles which are called the faubourgs of Paris,—all
tests/les_miserables.txt:60577:this, taken together, disturbed the military chiefs. They made haste to
tests/les_miserables.txt:60578:stamp out these beginnings of conflagration.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60580:They delayed the attack on the barricades Maubuée, de la Chanvrerie and
tests/les_miserables.txt:60582:they might have to deal with the barricades only and be able to finish
tests/les_miserables.txt:60585:now slowly and cautiously, now at full charge. The troops broke in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60586:doors of houses whence shots had been fired; at the same time,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60587:manœuvres by the cavalry dispersed the groups on the boulevards. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:60588:repression was not effected without some commotion, and without that
tests/les_miserables.txt:60589:tumultuous uproar peculiar to collisions between the army and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60590:people. This was what Enjolras had caught in the intervals of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60591:cannonade and the musketry. Moreover, he had seen wounded men passing
tests/les_miserables.txt:60592:the end of the street in litters, and he said to Courfeyrac:—“Those
tests/les_miserables.txt:60593:wounded do not come from us.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60596:Their hope did not last long; the gleam was quickly eclipsed. In less
tests/les_miserables.txt:60598:lightning unaccompanied by thunder, and the insurgents felt that sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:60599:of leaden cope, which the indifference of the people casts over
tests/les_miserables.txt:60600:obstinate and deserted men, fall over them once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60602:The general movement, which seemed to have assumed a vague outline, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:60603:miscarried; and the attention of the minister of war and the strategy
tests/les_miserables.txt:60604:of the generals could now be concentrated on the three or four
tests/les_miserables.txt:60605:barricades which still remained standing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60625:Courfeyrac, seated on a paving-stone beside Enjolras, continued to
tests/les_miserables.txt:60626:insult the cannon, and each time that that gloomy cloud of projectiles
tests/les_miserables.txt:60627:which is called grape-shot passed overhead with its terrible sound he
tests/les_miserables.txt:60631:you are wasting your row. That’s not thunder, it’s a cough.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60636:Courfeyrac and Bossuet, whose brave good humor increased with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60637:peril, like Madame Scarron, replaced nourishment with pleasantry, and,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60638:as wine was lacking, they poured out gayety to all.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60641:He lives alone, which renders him a little sad, perhaps; Enjolras
tests/les_miserables.txt:60642:complains of his greatness, which binds him to widowhood. The rest of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60643:us have mistresses, more or less, who make us crazy, that is to say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60644:brave. When a man is as much in love as a tiger, the least that he can
tests/les_miserables.txt:60646:the capers that mesdames our grisettes play on us. Roland gets himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:60647:killed for Angélique; all our heroism comes from our women. A man
tests/les_miserables.txt:60651:should be as cold as ice and as bold as fire.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60655:that person would have heard him mutter in a low voice: “Patria.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60658:Bossuet was still laughing when Courfeyrac exclaimed:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60663:And assuming the tone of an usher making an announcement, he added:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60668:In fact, a new personage had entered on the scene. This was a second
tests/les_miserables.txt:60669:piece of ordnance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60671:The artillery-men rapidly performed their manœuvres in force and placed
tests/les_miserables.txt:60672:this second piece in line with the first.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60674:This outlined the catastrophe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60676:A few minutes later, the two pieces, rapidly served, were firing
tests/les_miserables.txt:60680:Another cannonade was audible at some distance. At the same time that
tests/les_miserables.txt:60681:the two guns were furiously attacking the redoubt from the Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:60682:Chanvrerie, two other cannons, trained one from the Rue Saint-Denis,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60683:the other from the Rue Aubry-le-Boucher, were riddling the Saint-Merry
tests/les_miserables.txt:60684:barricade. The four cannons echoed each other mournfully.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60686:The barking of these sombre dogs of war replied to each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60688:One of the two pieces which was now battering the barricade on the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:60691:The piece which was firing balls was pointed a little high, and the aim
tests/les_miserables.txt:60692:was calculated so that the ball struck the extreme edge of the upper
tests/les_miserables.txt:60693:crest of the barricade, and crumbled the stone down upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60696:The object of this mode of firing was to drive the insurgents from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60697:summit of the redoubt, and to compel them to gather close in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60698:interior, that is to say, this announced the assault.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60700:The combatants once driven from the crest of the barricade by balls,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60701:and from the windows of the cabaret by grape-shot, the attacking
tests/les_miserables.txt:60702:columns could venture into the street without being picked off,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60703:perhaps, even, without being seen, could briskly and suddenly scale the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60704:redoubt, as on the preceding evening, and, who knows? take it by
tests/les_miserables.txt:60707:“It is absolutely necessary that the inconvenience of those guns should
tests/les_miserables.txt:60712:All were ready. The barricade, which had long been silent, poured forth
tests/les_miserables.txt:60713:a desperate fire; seven or eight discharges followed, with a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60716:thirds of the gunners could be distinguished lying beneath the wheels
tests/les_miserables.txt:60717:of the cannons. Those who were left standing continued to serve the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60718:pieces with severe tranquillity, but the fire had slackened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60720:“Things are going well now,” said Bossuet to Enjolras. “Success.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60725:“Another quarter of an hour of this success, and there will not be any
tests/les_miserables.txt:60726:cartridges left in the barricade.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60729:It appears that Gavroche overheard this remark.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60737:Courfeyrac suddenly caught sight of some one at the base of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60738:barricade, outside in the street, amid the bullets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60740:Gavroche had taken a bottle basket from the wine-shop, had made his way
tests/les_miserables.txt:60741:out through the cut, and was quietly engaged in emptying the full
tests/les_miserables.txt:60742:cartridge-boxes of the National Guardsmen who had been killed on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60745:“What are you doing there?” asked Courfeyrac.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60747:Gavroche raised his face:—
tests/les_miserables.txt:60749:“I’m filling my basket, citizen.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60755:Gavroche replied:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60760:Courfeyrac shouted:—“Come in!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60763:“Instanter,” said Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60767:It will be remembered that Fannicot’s company had left behind it a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60768:trail of bodies. Twenty corpses lay scattered here and there on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60769:pavement, through the whole length of the street. Twenty cartouches for
tests/les_miserables.txt:60770:Gavroche meant a provision of cartridges for the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60772:The smoke in the street was like a fog. Whoever has beheld a cloud
tests/les_miserables.txt:60773:which has fallen into a mountain gorge between two peaked escarpments
tests/les_miserables.txt:60774:can imagine this smoke rendered denser and thicker by two gloomy rows
tests/les_miserables.txt:60775:of lofty houses. It rose gradually and was incessantly renewed; hence a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60776:twilight which made even the broad daylight turn pale. The combatants
tests/les_miserables.txt:60777:could hardly see each other from one end of the street to the other,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60780:This obscurity, which had probably been desired and calculated on by
tests/les_miserables.txt:60781:the commanders who were to direct the assault on the barricade, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:60782:useful to Gavroche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60785:he could advance tolerably far into the street without being seen. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:60786:rifled the first seven or eight cartridge-boxes without much danger.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60788:He crawled flat on his belly, galloped on all fours, took his basket in
tests/les_miserables.txt:60790:another, and emptied the cartridge-box or cartouche as a monkey opens a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60793:They did not dare to shout to him to return from the barricade, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:60794:was quite near, for fear of attracting attention to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60796:On one body, that of a corporal, he found a powder-flask.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60798:“For thirst,” said he, putting it in his pocket.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60800:By dint of advancing, he reached a point where the fog of the fusillade
tests/les_miserables.txt:60801:became transparent. So that the sharpshooters of the line ranged on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60803:banlieue massed at the corner of the street suddenly pointed out to
tests/les_miserables.txt:60804:each other something moving through the smoke.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60806:At the moment when Gavroche was relieving a sergeant, who was lying
tests/les_miserables.txt:60807:near a stone door-post, of his cartridges, a bullet struck the body.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60809:“Fichtre!” ejaculated Gavroche. “They are killing my dead men for me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:60812:A second bullet struck a spark from the pavement beside him.—A third
tests/les_miserables.txt:60815:Gavroche looked and saw that this came from the men of the banlieue.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60817:He sprang to his feet, stood erect, with his hair flying in the wind,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60832:Then he picked up his basket, replaced the cartridges which had fallen
tests/les_miserables.txt:60833:from it, without missing a single one, and, advancing towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60834:fusillade, set about plundering another cartridge-box. There a fourth
tests/les_miserables.txt:60835:bullet missed him, again. Gavroche sang:
tests/les_miserables.txt:60848:A fifth bullet only succeeded in drawing from him a third couplet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60850:“Joie est mon caractère,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60855:“Joy is my character,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60863:It was a charming and terrible sight. Gavroche, though shot at, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:60865:the sparrow pecking at the sportsmen. To each discharge he retorted
tests/les_miserables.txt:60866:with a couplet. They aimed at him constantly, and always missed him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60868:him. He lay down, sprang to his feet, hid in the corner of a doorway,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60869:then made a bound, disappeared, reappeared, scampered away, returned,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60871:while, went on pillaging the cartouches, emptying the cartridge-boxes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60873:him with their eyes. The barricade trembled; he sang. He was not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60874:child, he was not a man; he was a strange gamin-fairy. He might have
tests/les_miserables.txt:60875:been called the invulnerable dwarf of the fray. The bullets flew after
tests/les_miserables.txt:60877:seek with death; every time that the flat-nosed face of the spectre
tests/les_miserables.txt:60878:approached, the urchin administered to it a fillip.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60880:One bullet, however, better aimed or more treacherous than the rest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60881:finally struck the will-o’-the-wisp of a child. Gavroche was seen to
tests/les_miserables.txt:60882:stagger, then he sank to the earth. The whole barricade gave vent to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60883:cry; but there was something of Antæus in that pygmy; for the gamin to
tests/les_miserables.txt:60884:touch the pavement is the same as for the giant to touch the earth;
tests/les_miserables.txt:60885:Gavroche had fallen only to rise again; he remained in a sitting
tests/les_miserables.txt:60886:posture, a long thread of blood streaked his face, he raised both arms
tests/les_miserables.txt:60887:in the air, glanced in the direction whence the shot had come, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:60901:He did not finish. A second bullet from the same marksman stopped him
tests/les_miserables.txt:60902:short. This time he fell face downward on the pavement, and moved no
tests/les_miserables.txt:60912:the drama must be everywhere present,—two children were holding each
tests/les_miserables.txt:60920:The elder, who was already somewhat of a protector, was leading his
tests/les_miserables.txt:60921:brother with his left hand and in his right he carried a small stick.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60924:been closed by order of the police, on account of the insurrection. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:60925:troops who had been bivouacking there had departed for the exigencies
tests/les_miserables.txt:60926:of combat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60928:How did those children come there? Perhaps they had escaped from some
tests/les_miserables.txt:60929:guard-house which stood ajar; perhaps there was in the vicinity, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60931:neighboring carrefour, dominated by the pediment on which could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:60933:from which they had fled; perhaps they had, on the preceding evening,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60934:escaped the eye of the inspectors of the garden at the hour of closing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60936:read the papers? The fact is, they were stray lambs and they seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:60938:creatures were, in fact, lost.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60940:These two children were the same over whom Gavroche had been put to
tests/les_miserables.txt:60941:some trouble, as the reader will recollect. Children of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60943:now leaves fallen from all these rootless branches, and swept over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60944:ground by the wind. Their clothing, which had been clean in Magnon’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:60945:day, and which had served her as a prospectus with M. Gillenormand, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:60946:been converted into rags.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60948:Henceforth these beings belonged to the statistics as “Abandoned
tests/les_miserables.txt:60949:children,” whom the police take note of, collect, mislay and find again
tests/les_miserables.txt:60952:It required the disturbance of a day like that to account for these
tests/les_miserables.txt:60953:miserable little creatures being in that garden. If the superintendents
tests/les_miserables.txt:60954:had caught sight of them, they would have driven such rags forth. Poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:60955:little things do not enter public gardens; still, people should reflect
tests/les_miserables.txt:60956:that, as children, they have a right to flowers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60958:These children were there, thanks to the locked gates. They were there
tests/les_miserables.txt:60959:contrary to the regulations. They had slipped into the garden and there
tests/les_miserables.txt:60960:they remained. Closed gates do not dismiss the inspectors, oversight is
tests/les_miserables.txt:60961:supposed to continue, but it grows slack and reposes; and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60962:inspectors, moved by the public anxiety and more occupied with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60963:outside than the inside, no longer glanced into the garden, and had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:60967:in June, showers do not count for much. An hour after a storm, it can
tests/les_miserables.txt:60969:summer, is as quickly dried as the cheek of a child. At that period of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60970:the solstice, the light of full noonday is, so to speak, poignant. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:60972:with a sort of suction. One would say that the sun was thirsty. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:60979:meadows, having water at their roots, and sun in their flowers, become
tests/les_miserables.txt:60980:perfuming-pans of incense, and smoke with all their odors at once.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60982:intoxicated. The springtime is a provisional paradise, the sun helps
tests/les_miserables.txt:60983:man to have patience.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60988:evil, contemplators of cosmos and radiantly forgetful of man, who do
tests/les_miserables.txt:60989:not understand how people can occupy themselves with the hunger of
tests/les_miserables.txt:60991:with the lymphatic curvature of the little spinal column, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:60992:pallet, the attic, the dungeon, and the rags of shivering young girls,
tests/les_miserables.txt:60993:when they can dream beneath the trees; peaceful and terrible spirits
tests/les_miserables.txt:60994:they, and pitilessly satisfied. Strange to say, the infinite suffices
tests/les_miserables.txt:60995:them. That great need of man, the finite, which admits of embrace, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:60996:ignore. The finite which admits of progress and sublime toil, they do
tests/les_miserables.txt:60997:not think about. The indefinite, which is born from the human and
tests/les_miserables.txt:60998:divine combination of the infinite and the finite, escapes them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:60999:Provided that they are face to face with immensity, they smile. Joy
tests/les_miserables.txt:61000:never, ecstasy forever. Their life lies in surrendering their
tests/les_miserables.txt:61001:personality in contemplation. The history of humanity is for them only
tests/les_miserables.txt:61006:look at this wonderful rosette which a slice of wood-cells of the pine
tests/les_miserables.txt:61007:presents under the microscope! Compare the most beautiful Mechlin lace
tests/les_miserables.txt:61008:to that if you can! These thinkers forget to love. The zodiac thrives
tests/les_miserables.txt:61009:with them to such a point that it prevents their seeing the weeping
tests/les_miserables.txt:61010:child. God eclipses their souls. This is a family of minds which are,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61011:at once, great and petty. Horace was one of them; so was Goethe. La
tests/les_miserables.txt:61012:Fontaine perhaps; magnificent egoists of the infinite, tranquil
tests/les_miserables.txt:61013:spectators of sorrow, who do not behold Nero if the weather be fair,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61014:for whom the sun conceals the funeral pile, who would look on at an
tests/les_miserables.txt:61015:execution by the guillotine in the search for an effect of light, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:61016:hear neither the cry nor the sob, nor the death rattle, nor the alarm
tests/les_miserables.txt:61017:peal, for whom everything is well, since there is a month of May, who,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61018:so long as there are clouds of purple and gold above their heads,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61019:declare themselves content, and who are determined to be happy until
tests/les_miserables.txt:61020:the radiance of the stars and the songs of the birds are exhausted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61022:These are dark radiances. They have no suspicion that they are to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:61025:at once night and day, without eyes beneath his lashes but with a star
tests/les_miserables.txt:61028:The indifference of these thinkers, is, according to some, a superior
tests/les_miserables.txt:61030:infirmity. One may be immortal and yet limp: witness Vulcan. One may be
tests/les_miserables.txt:61031:more than man and less than man. There is incomplete immensity in
tests/les_miserables.txt:61034:But then, what? In whom can we trust? _Solem quis dicere falsum
tests/les_miserables.txt:61035:audeat?_ Who shall dare to say that the sun is false? Thus certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:61036:geniuses, themselves, certain Very-Lofty mortals, man-stars, may be
tests/les_miserables.txt:61037:mistaken? That which is on high at the summit, at the crest, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61038:zenith, that which sends down so much light on the earth, sees but
tests/les_miserables.txt:61042:On the 6th of June, 1832, about eleven o’clock in the morning, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61043:Luxembourg, solitary and depopulated, was charming. The quincunxes and
tests/les_miserables.txt:61045:branches, wild with the brilliant glow of midday, seemed endeavoring to
tests/les_miserables.txt:61046:embrace. In the sycamores there was an uproar of linnets, sparrows
tests/les_miserables.txt:61047:triumphed, woodpeckers climbed along the chestnut trees, administering
tests/les_miserables.txt:61048:little pecks on the bark. The flower-beds accepted the legitimate
tests/les_miserables.txt:61049:royalty of the lilies; the most august of perfumes is that which
tests/les_miserables.txt:61050:emanates from whiteness. The peppery odor of the carnations was
tests/les_miserables.txt:61051:perceptible. The old crows of Marie de Medici were amorous in the tall
tests/les_miserables.txt:61053:tulips, which are nothing but all the varieties of flame made into
tests/les_miserables.txt:61055:flame-flowers, hummed. All was grace and gayety, even the impending
tests/les_miserables.txt:61056:rain; this relapse, by which the lilies of the valley and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61057:honeysuckles were destined to profit, had nothing disturbing about it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:61058:the swallows indulged in the charming threat of flying low. He who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:61060:candor, help, assistance, paternity, caress, dawn. The thoughts which
tests/les_miserables.txt:61065:pierced with light; these goddesses were all tattered with sunlight;
tests/les_miserables.txt:61067:was already dried up to the point of being burnt. There was sufficient
tests/les_miserables.txt:61068:breeze to raise little insurrections of dust here and there. A few
tests/les_miserables.txt:61069:yellow leaves, left over from the autumn, chased each other merrily,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61070:and seemed to be playing tricks on each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61072:This abundance of light had something indescribably reassuring about
tests/les_miserables.txt:61073:it. Life, sap, heat, odors overflowed; one was conscious, beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:61074:creation, of the enormous size of the source; in all these breaths
tests/les_miserables.txt:61075:permeated with love, in this interchange of reverberations and
tests/les_miserables.txt:61076:reflections, in this marvellous expenditure of rays, in this infinite
tests/les_miserables.txt:61078:inexhaustible; and, behind this splendor as behind a curtain of flame,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61079:one caught a glimpse of God, that millionaire of stars.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61081:Thanks to the sand, there was not a speck of mud; thanks to the rain,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61082:there was not a grain of ashes. The clumps of blossoms had just been
tests/les_miserables.txt:61083:bathed; every sort of velvet, satin, gold and varnish, which springs
tests/les_miserables.txt:61084:from the earth in the form of flowers, was irreproachable. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:61085:magnificence was cleanly. The grand silence of happy nature filled the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61086:garden. A celestial silence that is compatible with a thousand sorts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61087:music, the cooing of nests, the buzzing of swarms, the flutterings of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61088:the breeze. All the harmony of the season was complete in one gracious
tests/les_miserables.txt:61089:whole; the entrances and exits of spring took place in proper order;
tests/les_miserables.txt:61090:the lilacs ended; the jasmines began; some flowers were tardy, some
tests/les_miserables.txt:61091:insects in advance of their time; the van-guard of the red June
tests/les_miserables.txt:61094:hollowed out undulations in the magnificent enormity of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61095:chestnut-trees. It was splendid. A veteran from the neighboring
tests/les_miserables.txt:61096:barracks, who was gazing through the fence, said: “Here is the Spring
tests/les_miserables.txt:61100:All nature was breakfasting; creation was at table; this was its hour;
tests/les_miserables.txt:61101:the great blue cloth was spread in the sky, and the great green cloth
tests/les_miserables.txt:61103:universal repast. Each creature had his pasture or his mess. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:61104:ring-dove found his hemp-seed, the chaffinch found his millet, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61105:goldfinch found chickweed, the red-breast found worms, the green finch
tests/les_miserables.txt:61107:each other somewhat, it is true, which is the misery of evil mixed with
tests/les_miserables.txt:61108:good; but not a beast of them all had an empty stomach.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61110:The two little abandoned creatures had arrived in the vicinity of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61112:hide themselves, the instinct of the poor and the weak in the presence
tests/les_miserables.txt:61113:of even impersonal magnificence; and they kept behind the swans’ hutch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61115:Here and there, at intervals, when the wind blew, shouts, clamor, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61116:sort of tumultuous death rattle, which was the firing, and dull blows,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61117:which were discharges of cannon, struck the ear confusedly. Smoke hung
tests/les_miserables.txt:61118:over the roofs in the direction of the Halles. A bell, which had the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61119:air of an appeal, was ringing in the distance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61121:These children did not appear to notice these noises. The little one
tests/les_miserables.txt:61125:Almost at the same instant with the children, another couple approached
tests/les_miserables.txt:61126:the great basin. They consisted of a goodman, about fifty years of age,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61128:and his son. The little man of six had a big brioche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61130:At that epoch, certain houses abutting on the river, in the Rues Madame
tests/les_miserables.txt:61131:and d’Enfer, had keys to the Luxembourg garden, of which the lodgers
tests/les_miserables.txt:61132:enjoyed the use when the gates were shut, a privilege which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:61133:suppressed later on. This father and son came from one of these houses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61136:The two poor little creatures watched “that gentleman” approaching, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:61140:heard, through his love fever, near the same grand basin, counselling
tests/les_miserables.txt:61141:his son “to avoid excesses.” He had an affable and haughty air, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61142:mouth which was always smiling, since it did not shut. This mechanical
tests/les_miserables.txt:61143:smile, produced by too much jaw and too little skin, shows the teeth
tests/les_miserables.txt:61144:rather than the soul. The child, with his brioche, which he had bitten
tests/les_miserables.txt:61145:into but had not finished eating, seemed satiated. The child was
tests/les_miserables.txt:61146:dressed as a National Guardsman, owing to the insurrection, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61147:father had remained clad as a bourgeois out of prudence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61150:This bourgeois appeared to cherish a special admiration for the swans.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61153:For the moment, the swans were swimming, which is their principal
tests/les_miserables.txt:61160:“The sage lives content with little. Look at me, my son. I do not love
tests/les_miserables.txt:61161:pomp. I am never seen in clothes decked with gold lace and stones; I
tests/les_miserables.txt:61165:Here the deep shouts which proceeded from the direction of the Halles
tests/les_miserables.txt:61166:burst out with fresh force of bell and uproar.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61168:“What is that?” inquired the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61175:All at once, he caught sight of the two little ragged boys behind the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61176:green swan-hutch.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61182:“Anarchy is entering this garden.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61185:In the meanwhile, his son took a bite of his brioche, spit it out, and,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61186:suddenly burst out crying.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61188:“What are you crying about?” demanded his father.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61190:“I am not hungry any more,” said the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61192:The father’s smile became more accentuated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61194:“One does not need to be hungry in order to eat a cake.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61197:“My cake tires me. It is stale.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61211:The child hesitated. A person may not want any more of his cake; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:61216:“Be humane. You must have compassion on animals.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61219:And, taking the cake from his son, he flung it into the basin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61221:The cake fell very near the edge.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61223:The swans were far away, in the centre of the basin, and busy with some
tests/les_miserables.txt:61224:prey. They had seen neither the bourgeois nor the brioche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61226:The bourgeois, feeling that the cake was in danger of being wasted, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:61227:moved by this useless shipwreck, entered upon a telegraphic agitation,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61228:which finally attracted the attention of the swans.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61230:They perceived something floating, steered for the edge like ships, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:61231:they are, and slowly directed their course toward the brioche, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61232:stupid majesty which befits white creatures.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61234:“The swans [_cygnes_] understand signs [_signes_],” said the bourgeois,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61237:At that moment, the distant tumult of the city underwent another sudden
tests/les_miserables.txt:61238:increase. This time it was sinister. There are some gusts of wind which
tests/les_miserables.txt:61239:speak more distinctly than others. The one which was blowing at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:61240:moment brought clearly defined drum-beats, clamors, platoon firing, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:61241:the dismal replies of the tocsin and the cannon. This coincided with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61242:black cloud which suddenly veiled the sun.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61244:The swans had not yet reached the brioche.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61246:“Let us return home,” said the father, “they are attacking the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61250:He grasped his son’s hand again. Then he continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:61252:“From the Tuileries to the Luxembourg, there is but the distance which
tests/les_miserables.txt:61257:He glanced at the cloud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61260:joining in; the younger branch is condemned. Let us return home
tests/les_miserables.txt:61261:quickly.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61264:“I should like to see the swans eat the brioche,” said the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61273:The son, regretting the swans, turned his head back toward the basin
tests/les_miserables.txt:61274:until a corner of the quincunxes concealed it from him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61276:In the meanwhile, the two little waifs had approached the brioche at
tests/les_miserables.txt:61278:of them stared at the cake, the elder gazed after the retreating
tests/les_miserables.txt:61281:Father and son entered the labyrinth of walks which leads to the grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:61282:flight of steps near the clump of trees on the side of the Rue Madame.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61284:As soon as they had disappeared from view, the elder child hastily
tests/les_miserables.txt:61285:flung himself flat on his stomach on the rounding curb of the basin,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61286:and clinging to it with his left hand, and leaning over the water, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:61287:the verge of falling in, he stretched out his right hand with his stick
tests/les_miserables.txt:61288:towards the cake. The swans, perceiving the enemy, made haste, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:61289:so doing, they produced an effect of their breasts which was of service
tests/les_miserables.txt:61290:to the little fisher; the water flowed back before the swans, and one
tests/les_miserables.txt:61291:of these gentle concentric undulations softly floated the brioche
tests/les_miserables.txt:61292:towards the child’s wand. Just as the swans came up, the stick touched
tests/les_miserables.txt:61293:the cake. The child gave it a brisk rap, drew in the brioche,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61294:frightened away the swans, seized the cake, and sprang to his feet. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:61295:cake was wet; but they were hungry and thirsty. The elder broke the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61296:cake into two portions, a large one and a small one, took the small one
tests/les_miserables.txt:61308:Marius dashed out of the barricade, Combeferre followed him. But he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:61309:too late. Gavroche was dead. Combeferre brought back the basket of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61310:cartridges; Marius bore the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61312:“Alas!” he thought, “that which the father had done for his father, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:61313:was requiting to the son; only, Thénardier had brought back his father
tests/les_miserables.txt:61314:alive; he was bringing back the child dead.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61317:When Marius re-entered the redoubt with Gavroche in his arms, his face,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61318:like the child, was inundated with blood.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61320:At the moment when he had stooped to lift Gavroche, a bullet had grazed
tests/les_miserables.txt:61321:his head; he had not noticed it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61323:Courfeyrac untied his cravat and with it bandaged Marius’ brow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61325:They laid Gavroche on the same table with Mabeuf, and spread over the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61326:two corpses the black shawl. There was enough of it for both the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:61327:man and the child.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61329:Combeferre distributed the cartridges from the basket which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:61332:This gave each man fifteen rounds to fire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61334:Jean Valjean was still in the same place, motionless on his stone post.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61335:When Combeferre offered him his fifteen cartridges, he shook his head.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61337:“Here’s a rare eccentric,” said Combeferre in a low voice to Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61338:“He finds a way of not fighting in this barricade.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61341:“Which does not prevent him from defending it,” responded Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61345:And Courfeyrac, who had overheard, added:
tests/les_miserables.txt:61350:One thing which must be noted is, that the fire which was battering the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61351:barricade hardly disturbed the interior. Those who have never traversed
tests/les_miserables.txt:61352:the whirlwind of this sort of war can form no idea of the singular
tests/les_miserables.txt:61353:moments of tranquillity mingled with these convulsions. Men go and
tests/les_miserables.txt:61354:come, they talk, they jest, they lounge. Some one whom we know heard a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61355:combatant say to him in the midst of the grape-shot: “We are here as at
tests/les_miserables.txt:61356:a bachelor breakfast.” The redoubt of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:61357:repeat, seemed very calm within. All mutations and all phases had been,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61358:or were about to be, exhausted. The position, from critical, had become
tests/les_miserables.txt:61359:menacing, and, from menacing, was probably about to become desperate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61361:empurpled the barricade more and more. Enjolras, who was grave,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61362:dominated it, in the attitude of a young Spartan sacrificing his naked
tests/les_miserables.txt:61366:Feuilly were making cartridges with the powder-flask picked up by
tests/les_miserables.txt:61367:Gavroche on the dead corporal, and Bossuet said to Feuilly: “We are
tests/les_miserables.txt:61368:soon to take the diligence for another planet”; Courfeyrac was
tests/les_miserables.txt:61369:disposing and arranging on some paving-stones which he had reserved for
tests/les_miserables.txt:61370:himself near Enjolras, a complete arsenal, his sword-cane, his gun, two
tests/les_miserables.txt:61371:holster pistols, and a cudgel, with the care of a young girl setting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61373:opposite him. An artisan was fastening Mother Hucheloup’s big straw hat
tests/les_miserables.txt:61375:young men from the Cougourde d’Aix were chatting merrily among
tests/les_miserables.txt:61377:who had taken Widow Hucheloup’s mirror from the wall, was examining his
tests/les_miserables.txt:61378:tongue in it. Some combatants, having discovered a few crusts of rather
tests/les_miserables.txt:61388:We must insist upon one psychological fact peculiar to barricades.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61389:Nothing which is characteristic of that surprising war of the streets
tests/les_miserables.txt:61392:Whatever may have been the singular inward tranquillity which we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:61393:just mentioned, the barricade, for those who are inside it, remains,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61396:There is something of the apocalypse in civil war, all the mists of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61397:unknown are commingled with fierce flashes, revolutions are sphinxes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61398:and any one who has passed through a barricade thinks he has traversed
tests/les_miserables.txt:61401:The feelings to which one is subject in these places we have pointed
tests/les_miserables.txt:61402:out in the case of Marius, and we shall see the consequences; they are
tests/les_miserables.txt:61403:both more and less than life. On emerging from a barricade, one no
tests/les_miserables.txt:61405:knows it not. One has been surrounded with conflicting ideas which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:61406:human faces; one’s head has been in the light of the future. There were
tests/les_miserables.txt:61407:corpses lying prone there, and phantoms standing erect. The hours were
tests/les_miserables.txt:61408:colossal and seemed hours of eternity. One has lived in death. Shadows
tests/les_miserables.txt:61411:One has beheld hands on which there was blood; there was a deafening
tests/les_miserables.txt:61412:horror; there was also a frightful silence; there were open mouths
tests/les_miserables.txt:61413:which shouted, and other open mouths which held their peace; one was in
tests/les_miserables.txt:61414:the midst of smoke, of night, perhaps. One fancied that one had touched
tests/les_miserables.txt:61420:All at once, between two discharges, the distant sound of a clock
tests/les_miserables.txt:61421:striking the hour became audible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61426:his feet, and from the summit of the barricade hurled this thundering
tests/les_miserables.txt:61435:appearance in battle array at the end of the street.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61437:This could only be the head of a column; and of what column? The
tests/les_miserables.txt:61438:attacking column, evidently; the sappers charged with the demolition of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61439:the barricade must always precede the soldiers who are to scale it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61441:They were, evidently, on the brink of that moment which M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61442:Clermont-Tonnerre, in 1822, called “the tug of war.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61445:Enjolras’ order was executed with the correct haste which is peculiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:61446:to ships and barricades, the only two scenes of combat where escape is
tests/les_miserables.txt:61447:impossible. In less than a minute, two thirds of the stones which
tests/les_miserables.txt:61448:Enjolras had had piled up at the door of Corinthe had been carried up
tests/les_miserables.txt:61449:to the first floor and the attic, and before a second minute had
tests/les_miserables.txt:61450:elapsed, these stones, artistically set one upon the other, walled up
tests/les_miserables.txt:61452:their height. A few loop-holes carefully planned by Feuilly, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61453:principal architect, allowed of the passage of the gun-barrels. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:61454:armament of the windows could be effected all the more easily since the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61455:firing of grape-shot had ceased. The two cannons were now discharging
tests/les_miserables.txt:61456:ball against the centre of the barrier in order to make a hole there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61457:and, if possible, a breach for the assault.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61459:When the stones destined to the final defence were in place, Enjolras
tests/les_miserables.txt:61460:had the bottles which he had set under the table where Mabeuf lay,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61461:carried to the first floor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61467:Then they barricaded the window below, and held in readiness the iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:61468:cross-bars which served to secure the door of the wine-shop at night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61470:The fortress was complete. The barricade was the rampart, the wine-shop
tests/les_miserables.txt:61471:was the dungeon. With the stones which remained they stopped up the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61474:As the defenders of a barricade are always obliged to be sparing of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61476:combine their arrangements with a sort of irritating leisure, expose
tests/les_miserables.txt:61477:themselves to fire prematurely, though in appearance more than in
tests/les_miserables.txt:61478:reality, and take their ease. The preparations for attack are always
tests/les_miserables.txt:61479:made with a certain methodical deliberation; after which, the lightning
tests/les_miserables.txt:61483:to perfect everything. He felt that, since such men were to die, their
tests/les_miserables.txt:61484:death ought to be a masterpiece.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61490:Marius posted himself on the lookout upon the crest of the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61492:Enjolras had the door of the kitchen, which was the ambulance, as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61497:He issued his final orders in the tap-room in a curt, but profoundly
tests/les_miserables.txt:61500:“On the first floor, hold your axes in readiness to cut the staircase.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61512:“That is good. There are now twenty-six combatants of us on foot. How
tests/les_miserables.txt:61520:hand. Swords and pistols in your belts. Twenty men to the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61521:Six ambushed in the attic windows, and at the window on the first floor
tests/les_miserables.txt:61523:a single worker remain inactive here. Presently, when the drum beats
tests/les_miserables.txt:61524:the assault, let the twenty below stairs rush to the barricade. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:61525:first to arrive will have the best places.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61538:“Here?” inquired a voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61540:“No, let us not mix their corpses with our own. The little barricade of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61541:the Mondétour lane can be scaled. It is only four feet high. The man is
tests/les_miserables.txt:61546:it was Javert. Here Jean Valjean made his appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61551:“You are the commander?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61560:“In the name of the Republic. The barricade has two saviors, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:61561:Pontmercy and yourself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61564:“Do you think that I deserve a recompense?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61579:Javert raised his head, saw Jean Valjean, made an almost imperceptible
tests/les_miserables.txt:61585:As for Enjolras, he had begun to re-load his rifle; he cut his eyes
tests/les_miserables.txt:61588:“No objections.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61596:Jean Valjean did, in fact, take possession of Javert, by seating
tests/les_miserables.txt:61598:click announced that he had cocked it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61600:Almost at the same moment, a blast of trumpets became audible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61602:“Take care!” shouted Marius from the top of the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61604:Javert began to laugh with that noiseless laugh which was peculiar to
tests/les_miserables.txt:61607:“You are in no better case than I am.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61612:The insurgents poured out tumultuously, and, as they went, received in
tests/les_miserables.txt:61613:the back,—may we be permitted the expression,—this sally of Javert’s:
tests/les_miserables.txt:61624:When Jean Valjean was left alone with Javert, he untied the rope which
tests/les_miserables.txt:61625:fastened the prisoner across the middle of the body, and the knot of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61626:which was under the table. After this he made him a sign to rise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61628:Javert obeyed with that indefinable smile in which the supremacy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61629:enchained authority is condensed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61633:emerged from the wine-shop slowly, because Javert, with his impeded
tests/les_miserables.txt:61634:limbs, could take only very short steps.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61638:In this manner they crossed the inner trapezium of the barricade. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:61639:insurgents, all intent on the attack, which was imminent, had their
tests/les_miserables.txt:61640:backs turned to these two.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61643:barricade, saw them pass. This group of victim and executioner was
tests/les_miserables.txt:61644:illuminated by the sepulchral light which he bore in his own soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61646:Jean Valjean with some difficulty, but without relaxing his hold for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61647:single instant, made Javert, pinioned as he was, scale the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:61648:entrenchment in the Mondétour lane.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61650:When they had crossed this barrier, they found themselves alone in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61651:lane. No one saw them. Among the heap they could distinguish a livid
tests/les_miserables.txt:61652:face, streaming hair, a pierced hand and the half nude breast of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61653:woman. It was Éponine. The corner of the houses hid them from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61654:insurgents. The corpses carried away from the barricade formed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61655:terrible pile a few paces distant.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61657:Javert gazed askance at this body, and, profoundly calm, said in a low
tests/les_miserables.txt:61666:which it required no words to interpret: “Javert, it is I.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61674:Jean Valjean drew from his pocket a knife, and opened it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61676:“A clasp-knife!” exclaimed Javert, “you are right. That suits you
tests/les_miserables.txt:61680:Jean Valjean cut the martingale which Javert had about his neck, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:61681:he cut the cords on his wrists, then, stooping down, he cut the cord on
tests/les_miserables.txt:61688:was, he could not repress a start. He remained open-mouthed and
tests/les_miserables.txt:61691:Jean Valjean continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:61693:“I do not think that I shall escape from this place. But if, by chance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61694:I do, I live, under the name of Fauchelevent, in the Rue de l’Homme
tests/les_miserables.txt:61698:Javert snarled like a tiger, which made him half open one corner of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:61701:“Have a care.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61708:“Thou saidst Fauchelevent, Rue de l’Homme Armé?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61714:Javert repeated in a low voice:—“Number 7.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61717:He buttoned up his coat once more, resumed the military stiffness
tests/les_miserables.txt:61719:supporting his chin on one of his hands, he set out in the direction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61727:Javert himself did not notice that he no longer addressed Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:61733:Javert retreated slowly. A moment later he turned the corner of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:61734:des Prêcheurs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61738:Then he returned to the barricade and said:
tests/les_miserables.txt:61743:In the meanwhile, this is what had taken place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61746:that time, taken a good look at the pinioned spy in the dark background
tests/les_miserables.txt:61749:When he beheld him in broad daylight, striding over the barricade in
tests/les_miserables.txt:61750:order to proceed to his death, he recognized him. Something suddenly
tests/les_miserables.txt:61751:recurred to his mind. He recalled the inspector of the Rue de Pontoise,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61752:and the two pistols which the latter had handed to him and which he,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61753:Marius, had used in this very barricade, and not only did he recall his
tests/les_miserables.txt:61754:face, but his name as well.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61756:This recollection was misty and troubled, however, like all his ideas.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61758:It was not an affirmation that he made, but a question which he put to
tests/les_miserables.txt:61761:“Is not that the inspector of police who told me that his name was
tests/les_miserables.txt:61766:in the first place, he must know whether this was Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61768:Marius called to Enjolras, who had just stationed himself at the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:61769:extremity of the barricade:
tests/les_miserables.txt:61783:“The police agent. Do you know his name?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61786:“Of course. He told us.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61799:Jean Valjean reappeared and cried: “It is done.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61802:A gloomy chill traversed Marius’ heart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61811:The death agony of the barricade was about to begin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61813:Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61814:thousand mysterious crashes in the air, the breath of armed masses set
tests/les_miserables.txt:61815:in movement in the streets which were not visible, the intermittent
tests/les_miserables.txt:61816:gallop of cavalry, the heavy shock of artillery on the march, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61817:firing by squads, and the cannonades crossing each other in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61819:roofs, indescribable and vaguely terrible cries, lightnings of menace
tests/les_miserables.txt:61820:everywhere, the tocsin of Saint-Merry, which now had the accents of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61822:sun and clouds, the beauty of the day, and the alarming silence of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61825:For, since the preceding evening, the two rows of houses in the Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:61826:la Chanvrerie had become two walls; ferocious walls, doors closed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61827:windows closed, shutters closed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61829:In those days, so different from those in which we live, when the hour
tests/les_miserables.txt:61830:was come, when the people wished to put an end to a situation, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:61831:had lasted too long, with a charter granted or with a legal country,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61832:when universal wrath was diffused in the atmosphere, when the city
tests/les_miserables.txt:61833:consented to the tearing up of the pavements, when insurrection made
tests/les_miserables.txt:61836:auxiliary of the combatant, and the house fraternized with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61837:improvised fortress which rested on it. When the situation was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:61838:ripe, when the insurrection was not decidedly admitted, when the masses
tests/les_miserables.txt:61839:disowned the movement, all was over with the combatants, the city was
tests/les_miserables.txt:61840:changed into a desert around the revolt, souls grew chilled, refuges
tests/les_miserables.txt:61842:take the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61844:A people cannot be forced, through surprise, to walk more quickly than
tests/les_miserables.txt:61845:it chooses. Woe to whomsoever tries to force its hand! A people does
tests/les_miserables.txt:61846:not let itself go at random. Then it abandons the insurrection to
tests/les_miserables.txt:61847:itself. The insurgents become noxious, infected with the plague. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:61848:house is an escarpment, a door is a refusal, a façade is a wall. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:61850:wall is a judge. It gazes at you and condemns you. What dismal things
tests/les_miserables.txt:61851:are closed houses. They seem dead, they are living. Life which is, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:61854:interior of that rock, people go and come, go to bed and rise again;
tests/les_miserables.txt:61856:afraid, a terrible thing! Fear excuses this fearful lack of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61857:hospitality; terror is mixed with it, an extenuating circumstance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61858:Sometimes, even, and this has been actually seen, fear turns to
tests/les_miserables.txt:61859:passion; fright may change into fury, as prudence does into rage; hence
tests/les_miserables.txt:61861:supreme terror, whence springs wrath like a mournful smoke.—“What do
tests/les_miserables.txt:61862:these people want? What have they come there to do? Let them get out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61863:the scrape. So much the worse for them. It is their fault. They are
tests/les_miserables.txt:61864:only getting what they deserve. It does not concern us. Here is our
tests/les_miserables.txt:61865:poor street all riddled with balls. They are a pack of rascals. Above
tests/les_miserables.txt:61868:sees the grape-shot and naked swords drawing near; if he cries, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:61869:knows that they are listening to him, and that no one will come; there
tests/les_miserables.txt:61870:stand walls which might protect him, there are men who might save him;
tests/les_miserables.txt:61873:Whom shall he reproach?
tests/les_miserables.txt:61877:The incomplete times in which we live.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61879:It is always at its own risk and peril that Utopia is converted into
tests/les_miserables.txt:61880:revolution, and from philosophical protest becomes an armed protest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61883:The Utopia which grows impatient and becomes revolt knows what awaits
tests/les_miserables.txt:61884:it; it almost always comes too soon. Then it becomes resigned, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:61885:stoically accepts catastrophe in lieu of triumph. It serves those who
tests/les_miserables.txt:61886:deny it without complaint, even excusing them, and even disculpates
tests/les_miserables.txt:61887:them, and its magnanimity consists in consenting to abandonment. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:61888:indomitable in the face of obstacles and gentle towards ingratitude.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61892:Yes, from the point of view of the human race.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61896:Progress is man’s mode of existence. The general life of the human race
tests/les_miserables.txt:61897:is called Progress, the collective stride of the human race is called
tests/les_miserables.txt:61898:Progress. Progress advances; it makes the great human and terrestrial
tests/les_miserables.txt:61899:journey towards the celestial and the divine; it has its halting places
tests/les_miserables.txt:61901:meditates, in the presence of some splendid Canaan suddenly unveiled on
tests/les_miserables.txt:61908:these lines, confounding progress with God, and taking the interruption
tests/les_miserables.txt:61912:short, we may say that it marches on, even when it is asleep, for it
tests/les_miserables.txt:61913:has increased in size. When we behold it erect once more, we find it
tests/les_miserables.txt:61914:taller. To be always peaceful does not depend on progress any more than
tests/les_miserables.txt:61915:it does on the stream; erect no barriers, cast in no boulders;
tests/les_miserables.txt:61916:obstacles make water froth and humanity boil. Hence arise troubles; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:61917:after these troubles, we recognize the fact that ground has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:61918:gained. Until order, which is nothing else than universal peace, has
tests/les_miserables.txt:61920:revolutions as its halting-places.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61922:What, then, is progress? We have just enunciated it; the permanent life
tests/les_miserables.txt:61926:offers resistance to the eternal life of the human race.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61928:Let us admit without bitterness, that the individual has his distinct
tests/les_miserables.txt:61929:interests, and can, without forfeiture, stipulate for his interest, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:61931:life has its rights, and is not bound to sacrifice itself constantly to
tests/les_miserables.txt:61932:the future. The generation which is passing in its turn over the earth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61933:is not forced to abridge it for the sake of the generations, its equal,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61937:successful in business, I have houses to lease, I have money in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61938:government funds, I am happy, I have a wife and children, I have all
tests/les_miserables.txt:61939:this, I desire to live, leave me in peace.”—Hence, at certain hours, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61940:profound cold broods over the magnanimous vanguard of the human race.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61943:war. It, the truth of to-morrow, borrows its mode of procedure, battle,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61945:pure idea, becomes a deed of violence. It complicates its heroism with
tests/les_miserables.txt:61946:a violence for which it is just that it should be held to answer; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61947:violence of occasion and expedient, contrary to principle, and for
tests/les_miserables.txt:61948:which it is fatally punished. The Utopia, insurrection, fights with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61949:old military code in its fist; it shoots spies, it executes traitors;
tests/les_miserables.txt:61952:longer any faith in radiance, its irresistible and incorruptible force.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61957:impossible for us not to admire, whether they succeed or not, those the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61958:glorious combatants of the future, the confessors of Utopia. Even when
tests/les_miserables.txt:61959:they miscarry, they are worthy of veneration; and it is, perhaps, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:61960:failure, that they possess the most majesty. Victory, when it is in
tests/les_miserables.txt:61961:accord with progress, merits the applause of the people; but a heroic
tests/les_miserables.txt:61962:defeat merits their tender compassion. The one is magnificent, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61963:other sublime. For our own part, we prefer martyrdom to success. John
tests/les_miserables.txt:61964:Brown is greater than Washington, and Pisacane is greater than
tests/les_miserables.txt:61967:It certainly is necessary that some one should take the part of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:61973:Revolutionists are accused of sowing fear abroad. Every barricade seems
tests/les_miserables.txt:61974:a crime. Their theories are incriminated, their aim suspected, their
tests/les_miserables.txt:61975:ulterior motive is feared, their conscience denounced. They are
tests/les_miserables.txt:61976:reproached with raising, erecting, and heaping up, against the reigning
tests/les_miserables.txt:61977:social state, a mass of miseries, of griefs, of iniquities, of wrongs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:61978:of despairs, and of tearing from the lowest depths blocks of shadow in
tests/les_miserables.txt:61979:order therein to embattle themselves and to combat. People shout to
tests/les_miserables.txt:61981:“That is because our barricade is made of good intentions.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:61984:The best thing, assuredly, is the pacific solution. In short, let us
tests/les_miserables.txt:61986:a good will which renders society uneasy. But it depends on society to
tests/les_miserables.txt:61988:violent remedy is necessary. To study evil amiably, to prove its
tests/les_miserables.txt:61989:existence, then to cure it. It is to this that we invite it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:61993:France, are striving for the grand work with the inflexible logic of
tests/les_miserables.txt:61995:progress; they accomplish the will of Providence; they perform a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61996:religious act. At the appointed hour, with as much disinterestedness as
tests/les_miserables.txt:61997:an actor who answers to his cue, in obedience to the divine
tests/les_miserables.txt:61998:stage-manager, they enter the tomb. And this hopeless combat, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:61999:stoical disappearance they accept in order to bring about the supreme
tests/les_miserables.txt:62000:and universal consequences, the magnificent and irresistibly human
tests/les_miserables.txt:62002:The French revolution is an act of God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62004:Moreover, there are, and it is proper to add this distinction to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62005:distinctions already pointed out in another chapter,—there are accepted
tests/les_miserables.txt:62006:revolutions, revolutions which are called revolutions; there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:62007:refused revolutions, which are called riots.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62009:An insurrection which breaks out, is an idea which is passing its
tests/les_miserables.txt:62010:examination before the people. If the people lets fall a black ball,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62011:the idea is dried fruit; the insurrection is a mere skirmish.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62017:They are positive. _A priori_, insurrection is repugnant to them, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:62018:the first place, because it often results in a catastrophe, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62019:second place, because it always has an abstraction as its point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62022:Because, and this is a noble thing, it is always for the ideal, and for
tests/les_miserables.txt:62023:the ideal alone, that those who sacrifice themselves do thus sacrifice
tests/les_miserables.txt:62024:themselves. An insurrection is an enthusiasm. Enthusiasm may wax wroth;
tests/les_miserables.txt:62025:hence the appeal to arms. But every insurrection, which aims at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62026:government or a régime, aims higher. Thus, for instance, and we insist
tests/les_miserables.txt:62027:upon it, what the chiefs of the insurrection of 1832, and, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:62028:particular, the young enthusiasts of the Rue de la Chanvrerie were
tests/les_miserables.txt:62029:combating, was not precisely Louis Philippe. The majority of them, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:62030:talking freely, did justice to this king who stood midway between
tests/les_miserables.txt:62031:monarchy and revolution; no one hated him. But they attacked the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62032:younger branch of the divine right in Louis Philippe as they had
tests/les_miserables.txt:62033:attacked its elder branch in Charles X.; and that which they wished to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62034:overturn in overturning royalty in France, was, as we have explained,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62037:despots. This is the manner in which they reasoned. Their aim was
tests/les_miserables.txt:62038:distant no doubt, vague perhaps, and it retreated in the face of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:62041:Thus it is. And we sacrifice ourselves for these visions, which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:62042:almost always illusions for the sacrificed, but illusions with which,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62043:after all, the whole of human certainty is mingled. We throw ourselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:62044:into these tragic affairs and become intoxicated with that which we are
tests/les_miserables.txt:62045:about to do. Who knows? We may succeed. We are few in number, we have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62047:law, the sovereignty of each one over himself from which no abdication
tests/les_miserables.txt:62048:is possible, justice and truth, and in case of need, we die like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62050:And we march straight before us, and once pledged, we do not draw back,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62051:and we rush onwards with head held low, cherishing as our hope an
tests/les_miserables.txt:62052:unprecedented victory, revolution completed, progress set free again,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62053:the aggrandizement of the human race, universal deliverance; and in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62056:These passages of arms for the sake of progress often suffer shipwreck,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62057:and we have just explained why. The crowd is restive in the presence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62058:the impulses of paladins. Heavy masses, the multitudes which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:62059:fragile because of their very weight, fear adventures; and there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62060:touch of adventure in the ideal.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62062:Moreover, and we must not forget this, interests which are not very
tests/les_miserables.txt:62064:stomach paralyzes the heart.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62066:The grandeur and beauty of France lies in this, that she takes less
tests/les_miserables.txt:62067:from the stomach than other nations: she more easily knots the rope
tests/les_miserables.txt:62068:about her loins. She is the first awake, the last asleep. She marches
tests/les_miserables.txt:62071:This arises from the fact that she is an artist.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62073:The ideal is nothing but the culminating point of logic, the same as
tests/les_miserables.txt:62074:the beautiful is nothing but the summit of the true. Artistic peoples
tests/les_miserables.txt:62075:are also consistent peoples. To love beauty is to see the light. That
tests/les_miserables.txt:62076:is why the torch of Europe, that is to say of civilization, was first
tests/les_miserables.txt:62077:borne by Greece, who passed it on to Italy, who handed it on to France.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62078:Divine, illuminating nations of scouts! _Vitælampada tradunt_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62081:its progress. The amount of civilization is measured by the quantity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62082:imagination. Only, a civilizing people should remain a manly people.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62083:Corinth, yes; Sybaris, no. Whoever becomes effeminate makes himself a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62085:artistic. In the matter of civilization, he must not refine, but he
tests/les_miserables.txt:62086:must sublime. On this condition, one gives to the human race the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62089:The modern ideal has its type in art, and its means is science. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:62090:through science that it will realize that august vision of the poets,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62091:the socially beautiful. Eden will be reconstructed by A+B. At the point
tests/les_miserables.txt:62092:which civilization has now reached, the exact is a necessary element of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62093:the splendid, and the artistic sentiment is not only served, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:62094:completed by the scientific organ; dreams must be calculated. Art,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62095:which is the conqueror, should have for support science, which is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62096:walker; the solidity of the creature which is ridden is of importance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62097:The modern spirit is the genius of Greece with the genius of India as
tests/les_miserables.txt:62098:its vehicle; Alexander on the elephant.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62100:Races which are petrified in dogma or demoralized by lucre are unfit to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62101:guide civilization. Genuflection before the idol or before money wastes
tests/les_miserables.txt:62102:away the muscles which walk and the will which advances. Hieratic or
tests/les_miserables.txt:62103:mercantile absorption lessens a people’s power of radiance, lowers its
tests/les_miserables.txt:62104:horizon by lowering its level, and deprives it of that intelligence, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:62105:once both human and divine of the universal goal, which makes
tests/les_miserables.txt:62107:Athens and Rome have and keep, throughout all the nocturnal darkness of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62108:the centuries, halos of civilization.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62110:France is in the same quality of race as Greece and Italy. She is
tests/les_miserables.txt:62112:she is good. She gives herself. Oftener than is the case with other
tests/les_miserables.txt:62113:races, is she in the humor for self-devotion and sacrifice. Only, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:62116:walk on when she desires to halt. France has her relapses into
tests/les_miserables.txt:62117:materialism, and, at certain instants, the ideas which obstruct that
tests/les_miserables.txt:62118:sublime brain have no longer anything which recalls French greatness
tests/les_miserables.txt:62120:be done in such a case? The giantess plays at being a dwarf; immense
tests/les_miserables.txt:62121:France has her freaks of pettiness. That is all.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62124:right to an eclipse. And all is well, provided that the light returns
tests/les_miserables.txt:62125:and that the eclipse does not degenerate into night. Dawn and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62126:resurrection are synonymous. The reappearance of the light is identical
tests/les_miserables.txt:62127:with the persistence of the _I_.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62129:Let us state these facts calmly. Death on the barricade or the tomb in
tests/les_miserables.txt:62130:exile, is an acceptable occasion for devotion. The real name of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62133:confine ourselves to entreating great nations not to retreat too far,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62134:when they do retreat. One must not push too far in descent under
tests/les_miserables.txt:62137:Matter exists, the minute exists, interest exists, the stomach exists;
tests/les_miserables.txt:62138:but the stomach must not be the sole wisdom. The life of the moment has
tests/les_miserables.txt:62140:fact that one is mounted does not preclude a fall. This can be seen in
tests/les_miserables.txt:62143:asked how it happens that it has abandoned Socrates for Falstaff, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:62144:replies: “Because I love statesmen.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:62147:One word more before returning to our subject, the conflict.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62149:A battle like the one which we are engaged in describing is nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:62150:else than a convulsion towards the ideal. Progress trammelled is
tests/les_miserables.txt:62151:sickly, and is subject to these tragic epilepsies. With that malady of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62152:progress, civil war, we have been obliged to come in contact in our
tests/les_miserables.txt:62153:passage. This is one of the fatal phases, at once act and entr’acte of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62154:that drama whose pivot is a social condemnation, and whose veritable
tests/les_miserables.txt:62159:The cry to which we frequently give utterance is our whole thought;
tests/les_miserables.txt:62160:and, at the point of this drama which we have now reached, the idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:62161:which it contains having still more than one trial to undergo, it is,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62165:The book which the reader has under his eye at this moment is, from one
tests/les_miserables.txt:62167:intermittences, exceptions and faults, the march from evil to good,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62169:conscience, from rottenness to life, from hell to heaven, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:62179:All at once, the drum beat the charge.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62181:The attack was a hurricane. On the evening before, in the darkness, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62182:barricade had been approached silently, as by a boa. Now, in broad
tests/les_miserables.txt:62183:daylight, in that widening street, surprise was decidedly impossible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62184:rude force had, moreover, been unmasked, the cannon had begun the roar,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62185:the army hurled itself on the barricade. Fury now became skill. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:62186:powerful detachment of infantry of the line, broken at regular
tests/les_miserables.txt:62187:intervals, by the National Guard and the Municipal Guard on foot, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62188:supported by serried masses which could be heard though not seen,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62189:debauched into the street at a run, with drums beating, trumpets
tests/les_miserables.txt:62191:imperturbable under the projectiles, charged straight for the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:62196:The insurgents fired impetuously. The barricade once scaled had a mane
tests/les_miserables.txt:62199:lion shakes off the dogs, and it was only covered with besiegers as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62200:cliff is covered with foam, to reappear, a moment later, beetling,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62201:black and formidable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62203:The column, forced to retreat, remained massed in the street,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62204:unprotected but terrible, and replied to the redoubt with a terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:62205:discharge of musketry. Any one who has seen fireworks will recall the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62206:sheaf formed of interlacing lightnings which is called a bouquet. Let
tests/les_miserables.txt:62207:the reader picture to himself this bouquet, no longer vertical but
tests/les_miserables.txt:62208:horizontal, bearing a bullet, buckshot or a biscaïen at the tip of each
tests/les_miserables.txt:62209:one of its jets of flame, and picking off dead men one after another
tests/les_miserables.txt:62210:from its clusters of lightning. The barricade was underneath it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62213:was almost barbarous and was complicated with a sort of heroic ferocity
tests/les_miserables.txt:62214:which began by the sacrifice of self.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62216:This was the epoch when a National Guardsman fought like a Zouave. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:62217:troop wished to make an end of it, insurrection was desirous of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62218:fighting. The acceptance of the death agony in the flower of youth and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62220:each one underwent the broadening growth of the death hour. The street
tests/les_miserables.txt:62221:was strewn with corpses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62223:The barricade had Enjolras at one of its extremities and Marius at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62224:other. Enjolras, who carried the whole barricade in his head, reserved
tests/les_miserables.txt:62226:his embrasure, without having even seen him; Marius fought unprotected.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62228:the breastworks. There is no more violent prodigal than the avaricious
tests/les_miserables.txt:62230:action than a dreamer. Marius was formidable and pensive. In battle he
tests/les_miserables.txt:62231:was as in a dream. One would have pronounced him a phantom engaged in
tests/les_miserables.txt:62234:The insurgents’ cartridges were giving out; but not their sarcasms. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:62235:this whirlwind of the sepulchre in which they stood, they laughed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62237:Courfeyrac was bareheaded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62241:Courfeyrac replied:
tests/les_miserables.txt:62243:“They have finally taken it away from me with cannon-balls.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:62246:Or they uttered haughty comments.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62248:“Can any one understand,” exclaimed Feuilly bitterly, “those men,—[and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62249:he cited names, well-known names, even celebrated names, some belonging
tests/les_miserables.txt:62255:And Combeferre restricted himself to replying with a grave smile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62258:stars, from a great distance.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:62261:The interior of the barricade was so strewn with torn cartridges that
tests/les_miserables.txt:62267:escarpment. This barricade, constructed as it was and admirably
tests/les_miserables.txt:62269:hold a legion in check. Nevertheless, the attacking column, constantly
tests/les_miserables.txt:62270:recruited and enlarged under the shower of bullets, drew inexorably
tests/les_miserables.txt:62272:closed in around the barricade as the vice grasps the wine-press.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62275:increasing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62281:fumbling in their pockets which had been emptied of cartridges, nearly
tests/les_miserables.txt:62282:all of whom were wounded, with head or arm bandaged with black and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62283:blood-stained linen, with holes in their clothes from which the blood
tests/les_miserables.txt:62284:trickled, and who were hardly armed with poor guns and notched swords,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62285:became Titans. The barricade was ten times attacked, approached,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62286:assailed, scaled, and never captured.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62288:In order to form an idea of this struggle, it is necessary to imagine
tests/les_miserables.txt:62289:fire set to a throng of terrible courages, and then to gaze at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62290:conflagration. It was not a combat, it was the interior of a furnace;
tests/les_miserables.txt:62291:there mouths breathed the flame; there countenances were extraordinary.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62292:The human form seemed impossible there, the combatants flamed forth
tests/les_miserables.txt:62293:there, and it was formidable to behold the going and coming in that red
tests/les_miserables.txt:62296:The successive and simultaneous scenes of this grand slaughter we
tests/les_miserables.txt:62297:renounce all attempts at depicting. The epic alone has the right to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62300:One would have pronounced this that hell of Brahmanism, the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:62301:redoubtable of the seventeen abysses, which the Veda calls the Forest
tests/les_miserables.txt:62305:of the sword, with their fists, at a distance, close at hand, from
tests/les_miserables.txt:62307:the windows of the wine-shop, from the cellar windows, whither some had
tests/les_miserables.txt:62308:crawled. They were one against sixty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62312:but a shapeless hole, tumultuously blocked with paving-stones.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62314:Bossuet was killed; Feuilly was killed; Courfeyrac was killed;
tests/les_miserables.txt:62317:cast a glance to heaven when he expired.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62319:Marius, still fighting, was so riddled with wounds, particularly in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62320:head, that his countenance disappeared beneath the blood, and one would
tests/les_miserables.txt:62321:have said that his face was covered with a red kerchief.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62323:Enjolras alone was not struck. When he had no longer any weapon, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:62324:reached out his hands to right and left and an insurgent thrust some
tests/les_miserables.txt:62327:cuts the throat of Axylus, son of Teuthranis, who dwelt in happy
tests/les_miserables.txt:62328:Arisba; Euryalus, son of Mecistæus, exterminates Dresos and Opheltios,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62330:blameless Bucolion; Ulysses overthrows Pidytes of Percosius;
tests/les_miserables.txt:62331:Antilochus, Ablerus; Polypætes, Astyalus; Polydamas, Otos, of Cyllene;
tests/les_miserables.txt:62332:and Teucer, Aretaon. Meganthios dies under the blows of Euripylus’
tests/les_miserables.txt:62334:the rocky city which is laved by the sounding river Satnoïs.” In our
tests/les_miserables.txt:62335:old poems of exploits, Esplandian attacks the giant marquis Swantibore
tests/les_miserables.txt:62336:with a cobbler’s shoulder-stick of fire, and the latter defends himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:62337:by stoning the hero with towers which he plucks up by the roots. Our
tests/les_miserables.txt:62338:ancient mural frescoes show us the two Dukes of Bretagne and Bourbon,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62339:armed, emblazoned and crested in war-like guise, on horseback and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62340:approaching each other, their battle-axes in hand, masked with iron,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62341:gloved with iron, booted with iron, the one caparisoned in ermine, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62343:his crown, Bourbon helmeted with a monster fleur de lys on his visor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62344:But, in order to be superb, it is not necessary to wear, like Yvon, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62345:ducal morion, to have in the fist, like Esplandian, a living flame, or,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62346:like Phyles, father of Polydamas, to have brought back from Ephyra a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62348:suffices to give one’s life for a conviction or a loyalty. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:62349:ingenuous little soldier, yesterday a peasant of Bauce or Limousin, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:62350:prowls with his clasp-knife by his side, around the children’s nurses
tests/les_miserables.txt:62351:in the Luxembourg garden, this pale young student bent over a piece of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62353:scissors,—take both of them, breathe upon them with a breath of duty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62354:place them face to face in the Carrefour Boucherat or in the blind
tests/les_miserables.txt:62355:alley Planche-Mibray, and let the one fight for his flag, and the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:62357:their country; the struggle will be colossal; and the shadow which this
tests/les_miserables.txt:62358:raw recruit and this sawbones in conflict will produce in that grand
tests/les_miserables.txt:62359:epic field where humanity is striving, will equal the shadow cast by
tests/les_miserables.txt:62360:Megaryon, King of Lycia, tiger-filled, crushing in his embrace the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62369:When there were no longer any of the leaders left alive, except
tests/les_miserables.txt:62370:Enjolras and Marius at the two extremities of the barricade, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62371:centre, which had so long sustained Courfeyrac, Joly, Bossuet, Feuilly
tests/les_miserables.txt:62372:and Combeferre, gave way. The cannon, though it had not effected a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62373:practicable breach, had made a rather large hollow in the middle of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62375:balls, and had crumbled away; and the rubbish which had fallen, now
tests/les_miserables.txt:62376:inside, now outside, had, as it accumulated, formed two piles in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62378:the other on the outside. The exterior slope presented an inclined
tests/les_miserables.txt:62379:plane to the attack.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62381:A final assault was there attempted, and this assault succeeded. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:62382:mass bristling with bayonets and hurled forward at a run, came up with
tests/les_miserables.txt:62383:irresistible force, and the serried front of battle of the attacking
tests/les_miserables.txt:62384:column made its appearance through the smoke on the crest of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62385:battlements. This time, it was decisive. The group of insurgents who
tests/les_miserables.txt:62386:were defending the centre retreated in confusion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62388:Then the gloomy love of life awoke once more in some of them. Many,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62390:wish to die. This is a moment when the instinct of self-preservation
tests/les_miserables.txt:62392:the lofty, six-story house which formed the background of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:62394:barricaded, and walled, as it were, from top to bottom. Before the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62395:troops of the line had reached the interior of the redoubt, there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:62396:time for a door to open and shut, the space of a flash of lightning was
tests/les_miserables.txt:62397:sufficient for that, and the door of that house, suddenly opened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62398:crack and closed again instantly, was life for these despairing men.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62399:Behind this house, there were streets, possible flight, space. They set
tests/les_miserables.txt:62400:to knocking at that door with the butts of their guns, and with kicks,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62401:shouting, calling, entreating, wringing their hands. No one opened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62406:sprang forward and protected them. Enjolras had shouted to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62407:soldiers: “Don’t advance!” and as an officer had not obeyed, Enjolras
tests/les_miserables.txt:62408:had killed the officer. He was now in the little inner court of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62409:redoubt, with his back planted against the Corinthe building, a sword
tests/les_miserables.txt:62411:wine-shop which he barred against assailants. He shouted to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62413:them with his body, and facing an entire battalion alone, he made them
tests/les_miserables.txt:62414:pass in behind him. All precipitated themselves thither. Enjolras,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62415:executing with his rifle, which he now used like a cane, what
tests/les_miserables.txt:62416:single-stick players call a “covered rose” round his head, levelled the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62420:with such violence, that, as it fell back into its frame, it showed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62421:five fingers of a soldier who had been clinging to it, cut off and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62424:Marius remained outside. A shot had just broken his collar bone, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:62426:already shut, he felt the shock of a vigorous hand seizing him, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62427:swoon in which his senses vanished, hardly allowed him time for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62433:wine-shop, had the same idea. But they had reached a moment when each
tests/les_miserables.txt:62435:bar across the door, and bolted it, and double-locked it with key and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62436:chain, while those outside were battering furiously at it, the soldiers
tests/les_miserables.txt:62444:more melancholy circumstance. During the few hours which had preceded
tests/les_miserables.txt:62445:the attack, it had been reported among them that the insurgents were
tests/les_miserables.txt:62448:accompaniment of civil wars, and it was a false report of this kind
tests/les_miserables.txt:62449:which, later on, produced the catastrophe of the Rue Transnonain.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62451:When the door was barricaded, Enjolras said to the others:
tests/les_miserables.txt:62456:Then he approached the table on which lay Mabeuf and Gavroche. Beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:62457:the black cloth two straight and rigid forms were visible, one large,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62458:the other small, and the two faces were vaguely outlined beneath the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62459:cold folds of the shroud. A hand projected from beneath the winding
tests/les_miserables.txt:62463:kissed his brow on the preceding evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62465:These were the only two kisses which he had bestowed in the course of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62468:Let us abridge the tale. The barricade had fought like a gate of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62470:resistances are dogged. No quarter. No flag of truce possible. Men are
tests/les_miserables.txt:62473:When Suchet says:—“Capitulate,”—Palafox replies: “After the war with
tests/les_miserables.txt:62474:cannon, the war with knives.” Nothing was lacking in the capture by
tests/les_miserables.txt:62475:assault of the Hucheloup wine-shop; neither paving-stones raining from
tests/les_miserables.txt:62477:by crushing them horribly, nor shots fired from the attic-windows and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62478:the cellar, nor the fury of attack, nor, finally, when the door
tests/les_miserables.txt:62481:which had been beaten in and flung on the ground, found not a single
tests/les_miserables.txt:62482:combatant there. The spiral staircase, hewn asunder with the axe, lay
tests/les_miserables.txt:62485:from there, through the hole in the ceiling, which had formed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62486:entrance of the stairs, a terrific fire burst forth. It was the last of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62487:their cartridges. When they were exhausted, when these formidable men
tests/les_miserables.txt:62488:on the point of death had no longer either powder or ball, each grasped
tests/les_miserables.txt:62489:in his hands two of the bottles which Enjolras had reserved, and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62490:which we have spoken, and held the scaling party in check with these
tests/les_miserables.txt:62491:frightfully fragile clubs. They were bottles of aquafortis.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62493:We relate these gloomy incidents of carnage as they occurred. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:62494:besieged man, alas! converts everything into a weapon. Greek fire did
tests/les_miserables.txt:62495:not disgrace Archimedes, boiling pitch did not disgrace Bayard. All war
tests/les_miserables.txt:62496:is a thing of terror, and there is no choice in it. The musketry of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62497:besiegers, though confined and embarrassed by being directed from below
tests/les_miserables.txt:62498:upwards, was deadly. The rim of the hole in the ceiling was speedily
tests/les_miserables.txt:62499:surrounded by heads of the slain, whence dripped long, red and smoking
tests/les_miserables.txt:62500:streams, the uproar was indescribable; a close and burning smoke almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:62501:produced night over this combat. Words are lacking to express horror
tests/les_miserables.txt:62502:when it has reached this pitch. There were no longer men in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:62503:conflict, which was now infernal. They were no longer giants matched
tests/les_miserables.txt:62504:with colossi. It resembled Milton and Dante rather than Homer. Demons
tests/les_miserables.txt:62505:attacked, spectres resisted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62507:It was heroism become monstrous.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62515:At length, by dint of mounting on each other’s backs, aiding themselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:62516:with the skeleton of the staircase, climbing up the walls, clinging to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62517:the ceiling, slashing away at the very brink of the trap-door, the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:62518:one who offered resistance, a score of assailants, soldiers, National
tests/les_miserables.txt:62519:Guardsmen, municipal guardsmen, in utter confusion, the majority
tests/les_miserables.txt:62520:disfigured by wounds in the face during that redoubtable ascent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62523:his feet, Enjolras. Without cartridges, without sword, he had nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:62524:in his hand now but the barrel of his gun whose stock he had broken
tests/les_miserables.txt:62525:over the head of those who were entering. He had placed the billiard
tests/les_miserables.txt:62527:corner of the room, and there, with haughty eye, and head borne high,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62529:speedily create an empty space around him. A cry arose:
tests/les_miserables.txt:62532:that he has placed himself there. Let him remain there. Let us shoot
tests/les_miserables.txt:62541:The audacity of a fine death always affects men. As soon as Enjolras
tests/les_miserables.txt:62542:folded his arms and accepted his end, the din of strife ceased in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62543:room, and this chaos suddenly stilled into a sort of sepulchral
tests/les_miserables.txt:62544:solemnity. The menacing majesty of Enjolras disarmed and motionless,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62546:and charming, who alone had not a wound, who was as indifferent as an
tests/les_miserables.txt:62547:invulnerable being, seemed, by the authority of his tranquil glance, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62548:constrain this sinister rabble to kill him respectfully. His beauty, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:62550:and rosy after the fearful four and twenty hours which had just
tests/les_miserables.txt:62551:elapsed, as though he could no more be fatigued than wounded. It was of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62552:him, possibly, that a witness spoke afterwards, before the council of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62553:war: “There was an insurgent whom I heard called Apollo.” A National
tests/les_miserables.txt:62558:Twelve men formed into a squad in the corner opposite Enjolras, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62566:An officer intervened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62587:Grantaire, it will be remembered, had been asleep ever since the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62588:preceding evening in the upper room of the wine-shop, seated on a chair
tests/les_miserables.txt:62592:hideous potion of absinthe-porter and alcohol had thrown him into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62593:lethargy. His table being small, and not suitable for the barricade, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:62597:slumber of the torpid bear and the satiated leech. Nothing had had any
tests/les_miserables.txt:62598:effect upon it, neither the fusillade, nor the cannon-balls, nor the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62599:grape-shot which had made its way through the window into the room
tests/les_miserables.txt:62601:replied to the cannonade, now and then, by a snore. He seemed to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:62602:waiting there for a bullet which should spare him the trouble of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62603:waking. Many corpses were strewn around him; and, at the first glance,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62607:Noise does not rouse a drunken man; silence awakens him. The fall of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62609:crumbling of all things was his lullaby. The sort of halt which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62610:tumult underwent in the presence of Enjolras was a shock to this heavy
tests/les_miserables.txt:62611:slumber. It had the effect of a carriage going at full speed, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:62612:suddenly comes to a dead stop. The persons dozing within it wake up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62613:Grantaire rose to his feet with a start, stretched out his arms, rubbed
tests/les_miserables.txt:62616:A fit of drunkenness reaching its end resembles a curtain which is torn
tests/les_miserables.txt:62617:away. One beholds, at a single glance and as a whole, all that it has
tests/les_miserables.txt:62618:concealed. All suddenly presents itself to the memory; and the drunkard
tests/les_miserables.txt:62619:who has known nothing of what has been taking place during the last
tests/les_miserables.txt:62620:twenty-four hours, has no sooner opened his eyes than he is perfectly
tests/les_miserables.txt:62621:informed. Ideas recur to him with abrupt lucidity; the obliteration of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62622:intoxication, a sort of steam which has obscured the brain, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:62623:dissipated, and makes way for the clear and sharply outlined
tests/les_miserables.txt:62626:Relegated, as he was, to one corner, and sheltered behind the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62628:even noticed Grantaire, and the sergeant was preparing to repeat his
tests/les_miserables.txt:62629:order: “Take aim!” when all at once, they heard a strong voice shout
tests/les_miserables.txt:62632:“Long live the Republic! I’m one of them.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:62635:Grantaire had risen. The immense gleam of the whole combat which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:62636:missed, and in which he had had no part, appeared in the brilliant
tests/les_miserables.txt:62637:glance of the transfigured drunken man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62639:He repeated: “Long live the Republic!” crossed the room with a firm
tests/les_miserables.txt:62640:stride and placed himself in front of the guns beside Enjolras.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62653:Enjolras, pierced by eight bullets, remained leaning against the wall,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62656:Grantaire fell at his feet, as though struck by a thunderbolt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62660:into the attic through a wooden lattice. They fought under the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:62663:omnibus, were slain by two shots fired from the attic. A man in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62667:release each other, they fell, clasped in a ferocious embrace. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:62668:similar conflict went on in the cellar. Shouts, shots, a fierce
tests/les_miserables.txt:62669:trampling. Then silence. The barricade was captured.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62671:The soldiers began to search the houses round about, and to pursue the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62680:Marius was, in fact, a prisoner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62682:The hand which had seized him from behind and whose grasp he had felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:62683:at the moment of his fall and his loss of consciousness was that of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62686:Jean Valjean had taken no other part in the combat than to expose
tests/les_miserables.txt:62689:present in the carnage, like a providence, those who fell were picked
tests/les_miserables.txt:62690:up, transported to the tap-room, and cared for. In the intervals, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:62691:reappeared on the barricade. But nothing which could resemble a blow,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62692:an attack or even personal defence proceeded from his hands. He held
tests/les_miserables.txt:62693:his peace and lent succor. Moreover, he had received only a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:62694:scratches. The bullets would have none of him. If suicide formed part
tests/les_miserables.txt:62695:of what he had meditated on coming to this sepulchre, to that spot, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:62696:had not succeeded. But we doubt whether he had thought of suicide, an
tests/les_miserables.txt:62697:irreligious act.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62699:Jean Valjean, in the thick cloud of the combat, did not appear to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:62704:The whirlwind of the attack was, at that moment, so violently
tests/les_miserables.txt:62705:concentrated upon Enjolras and upon the door of the wine-shop, that no
tests/les_miserables.txt:62707:traverse the unpaved field of the barricade and disappear behind the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62710:The reader will recall this angle which formed a sort of cape on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62712:eyes, and a few square feet of space. There is sometimes a chamber
tests/les_miserables.txt:62713:which does not burn in the midst of a conflagration, and in the midst
tests/les_miserables.txt:62716:interior trapezium of the barricade, that Éponine had breathed her
tests/les_miserables.txt:62719:There Jean Valjean halted, let Marius slide to the ground, placed his
tests/les_miserables.txt:62720:back against the wall, and cast his eyes about him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62725:shelter, but how was he to escape from this massacre? He recalled the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62726:anguish which he had suffered in the Rue Polonceau eight years before,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62727:and in what manner he had contrived to make his escape; it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:62728:difficult then, to-day it was impossible. He had before him that deaf
tests/les_miserables.txt:62729:and implacable house, six stories in height, which appeared to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:62731:right the rather low barricade, which shut off the Rue de la Petite
tests/les_miserables.txt:62732:Truanderie; to pass this obstacle seemed easy, but beyond the crest of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62734:posted on the watch behind that barricade. It was evident, that to pass
tests/les_miserables.txt:62735:the barricade was to go in quest of the fire of the platoon, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:62736:any head which should run the risk of lifting itself above the top of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62738:left he had the field of battle. Death lurked round the corner of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:62743:Only a bird could have extricated itself from this predicament.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62745:And it was necessary to decide on the instant, to devise some
tests/les_miserables.txt:62746:expedient, to come to some decision. Fighting was going on a few paces
tests/les_miserables.txt:62748:the wine-shop; but if it should occur to one soldier, to one single
tests/les_miserables.txt:62749:soldier, to turn the corner of the house, or to attack him on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62752:Jean Valjean gazed at the house facing him, he gazed at the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:62753:at one side of him, then he looked at the ground, with the violence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62755:pierce a hole there with his eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62757:By dint of staring, something vaguely striking in such an agony began
tests/les_miserables.txt:62759:of glance which made the thing desired unfold. A few paces distant he
tests/les_miserables.txt:62760:perceived, at the base of the small barrier so pitilessly guarded and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62761:watched on the exterior, beneath a disordered mass of paving-stones
tests/les_miserables.txt:62762:which partly concealed it, an iron grating, placed flat and on a level
tests/les_miserables.txt:62764:two feet square. The frame of paving-stones which supported it had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:62767:Through the bars a view could be had of a dark aperture, something like
tests/les_miserables.txt:62768:the flue of a chimney, or the pipe of a cistern. Jean Valjean darted
tests/les_miserables.txt:62769:forward. His old art of escape rose to his brain like an illumination.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62771:was as inert as a dead body, upon his shoulders, to descend, with this
tests/les_miserables.txt:62774:which the loosened stones rolled down afresh, fall into its place
tests/les_miserables.txt:62775:behind him, to gain his footing on a flagged surface three metres below
tests/les_miserables.txt:62776:the surface,—all this was executed like that which one does in dreams,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62780:Jean Valjean found himself with Marius, who was still unconscious, in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62781:sort of long, subterranean corridor.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62783:There reigned profound peace, absolute silence, night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62785:The impression which he had formerly experienced when falling from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62786:wall into the convent recurred to him. Only, what he was carrying
tests/les_miserables.txt:62787:to-day was not Cosette; it was Marius. He could barely hear the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62802:Paris casts twenty-five millions yearly into the water. And this
tests/les_miserables.txt:62804:object? With no object. With what intention? With no intention. Why?
tests/les_miserables.txt:62808:Twenty-five millions is the most moderate approximative figure which
tests/les_miserables.txt:62809:the valuations of special science have set upon it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62811:Science, after having long groped about, now knows that the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:62812:fecundating and the most efficacious of fertilizers is human manure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62813:The Chinese, let us confess it to our shame, knew it before us. Not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62814:Chinese peasant—it is Eckberg who says this,—goes to town without
tests/les_miserables.txt:62815:bringing back with him, at the two extremities of his bamboo pole, two
tests/les_miserables.txt:62816:full buckets of what we designate as filth. Thanks to human dung, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62818:wheat yields a hundred fold of the seed. There is no guano comparable
tests/les_miserables.txt:62819:in fertility with the detritus of a capital. A great city is the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:62820:mighty of dung-makers. Certain success would attend the experiment of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62821:employing the city to manure the plain. If our gold is manure, our
tests/les_miserables.txt:62826:Fleets of vessels are despatched, at great expense, to collect the dung
tests/les_miserables.txt:62827:of petrels and penguins at the South Pole, and the incalculable element
tests/les_miserables.txt:62828:of opulence which we have on hand, we send to the sea. All the human
tests/les_miserables.txt:62829:and animal manure which the world wastes, restored to the land instead
tests/les_miserables.txt:62830:of being cast into the water, would suffice to nourish the world.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62832:Those heaps of filth at the gate-posts, those tumbrils of mud which
tests/les_miserables.txt:62833:jolt through the street by night, those terrible casks of the street
tests/les_miserables.txt:62834:department, those fetid drippings of subterranean mire, which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62837:they are cattle, they are the satisfied bellows of great oxen in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62841:mysterious creation which is transformation on earth and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62844:Restore this to the great crucible; your abundance will flow forth from
tests/les_miserables.txt:62847:You have it in your power to lose this wealth, and to consider me
tests/les_miserables.txt:62848:ridiculous to boot. This will form the master-piece of your ignorance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62850:Statisticians have calculated that France alone makes a deposit of half
tests/les_miserables.txt:62851:a milliard every year, in the Atlantic, through the mouths of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:62852:rivers. Note this: with five hundred millions we could pay one quarter
tests/les_miserables.txt:62853:of the expenses of our budget. The cleverness of man is such that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:62855:the very substance of the people that is carried off, here drop by
tests/les_miserables.txt:62856:drop, there wave after wave, the wretched outpour of our sewers into
tests/les_miserables.txt:62857:the rivers, and the gigantic collection of our rivers into the ocean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62858:Every hiccough of our sewers costs us a thousand francs. From this
tests/les_miserables.txt:62865:So far as Paris is concerned, it has become indispensable of late, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62868:A double tubular apparatus, provided with valves and sluices, sucking
tests/les_miserables.txt:62869:up and driving back, a system of elementary drainage, simple as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62870:lungs of a man, and which is already in full working order in many
tests/les_miserables.txt:62871:communities in England, would suffice to conduct the pure water of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62872:fields into our cities, and to send back to the fields the rich water
tests/les_miserables.txt:62873:of the cities, and this easy exchange, the simplest in the world, would
tests/les_miserables.txt:62877:The process actually in use does evil, with the intention of doing
tests/les_miserables.txt:62878:good. The intention is good, the result is melancholy. Thinking to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62879:purge the city, the population is blanched like plants raised in
tests/les_miserables.txt:62880:cellars. A sewer is a mistake. When drainage, everywhere, with its
tests/les_miserables.txt:62881:double function, restoring what it takes, shall have replaced the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62882:sewer, which is a simple impoverishing washing, then, this being
tests/les_miserables.txt:62883:combined with the data of a now social economy, the product of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62884:earth will be increased tenfold, and the problem of misery will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:62888:In the meanwhile, the public wealth flows away to the river, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62889:leakage takes place. Leakage is the word. Europe is being ruined in
tests/les_miserables.txt:62892:As for France, we have just cited its figures. Now, Paris contains one
tests/les_miserables.txt:62893:twenty-fifth of the total population of France, and Parisian guano
tests/les_miserables.txt:62894:being the richest of all, we understate the truth when we value the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62896:which France annually rejects. These twenty-five millions, employed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:62897:assistance and enjoyment, would double the splendor of Paris. The city
tests/les_miserables.txt:62900:stream of gold from full hands, its pomp, its luxury, its magnificence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62903:It is in this manner that, in the blindness of a poor political
tests/les_miserables.txt:62904:economy, we drown and allow to float downstream and to be lost in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62906:the public fortune.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62908:Economically considered, the matter can be summed up thus: Paris is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62909:spendthrift. Paris, that model city, that patron of well-arranged
tests/les_miserables.txt:62910:capitals, of which every nation strives to possess a copy, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:62911:metropolis of the ideal, that august country of the initiative, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62912:impulse and of effort, that centre and that dwelling of minds, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:62913:nation-city, that hive of the future, that marvellous combination of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62915:shoulders, from the point of view which we have just indicated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62919:Moreover, and particularly in this immemorial and senseless waste,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62923:young folly. The ancients did like the moderns. “The sewers of Rome,”
tests/les_miserables.txt:62926:Italy, and when she had put Italy in her sewer, she poured in Sicily,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62927:then Sardinia, then Africa. The sewer of Rome has engulfed the world.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62928:This cesspool offered its engulfment to the city and the universe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62929:_Urbi et orbi_. Eternal city, unfathomable sewer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62933:Paris follows this example with all the stupidity peculiar to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62936:For the requirements of the operation upon the subject of which we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:62938:of sewers; which has its streets, its crossroads, its squares, its
tests/les_miserables.txt:62939:blind-alleys, its arteries, and its circulation, which is of mire and
tests/les_miserables.txt:62944:Paris contains Athens, the city of light, Tyre, the city of might,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62945:Sparta, the city of virtue, Nineveh, the city of marvels, it also
tests/les_miserables.txt:62946:contains Lutetia, the city of mud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62948:However, the stamp of its power is there also, and the Titanic sink of
tests/les_miserables.txt:62950:humanity by some men like Macchiavelli, Bacon and Mirabeau, grandiose
tests/les_miserables.txt:62953:The sub-soil of Paris, if the eye could penetrate its surface, would
tests/les_miserables.txt:62954:present the aspect of a colossal madrepore. A sponge has no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:62955:partitions and ducts than the mound of earth for a circuit of six
tests/les_miserables.txt:62956:leagues round about, on which rests the great and ancient city. Not to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62957:mention its catacombs, which are a separate cellar, not to mention the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62958:inextricable trellis-work of gas pipes, without reckoning the vast
tests/les_miserables.txt:62959:tubular system for the distribution of fresh water which ends in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62961:under the two banks; a labyrinth which has its slope for its guiding
tests/les_miserables.txt:62964:There appears, in the humid mist, the rat which seems the product to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62965:which Paris has given birth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62973:Let the reader imagine Paris lifted off like a cover, the subterranean
tests/les_miserables.txt:62975:species of large branch grafted on the river. On the right bank, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62976:belt sewer will form the trunk of this branch, the secondary ducts will
tests/les_miserables.txt:62977:form the branches, and those without exit the twigs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:62979:This figure is but a summary one and half exact, the right angle, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:62980:is the customary angle of this species of subterranean ramifications,
tests/les_miserables.txt:62983:A more accurate image of this strange geometrical plan can be formed by
tests/les_miserables.txt:62984:supposing that one is viewing some eccentric oriental alphabet, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:62985:intricate as a thicket, against a background of shadows, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62987:confusion, and as at haphazard, now by their angles, again by their
tests/les_miserables.txt:62992:decomposition, these monstrous cradles of death, with a fear that was
tests/les_miserables.txt:62993:almost religious. The vermin ditch of Benares is no less conducive to
tests/les_miserables.txt:62994:giddiness than the lions’ ditch of Babylon. Teglath-Phalasar, according
tests/les_miserables.txt:62995:to the rabbinical books, swore by the sink of Nineveh. It was from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62996:sewer of Münster that John of Leyden produced his false moon, and it
tests/les_miserables.txt:62997:was from the cesspool of Kekscheb that oriental menalchme, Mokanna, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:62998:veiled prophet of Khorassan, caused his false sun to emerge.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63000:The history of men is reflected in the history of sewers. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:63001:Germoniæ58 narrated Rome. The sewer of Paris has been an ancient and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63002:formidable thing. It has been a sepulchre, it has served as an asylum.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63003:Crime, intelligence, social protest, liberty of conscience, thought,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63004:theft, all that human laws persecute or have persecuted, is hidden in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63005:that hole; the _maillotins_ in the fourteenth century, the _tire-laine_
tests/les_miserables.txt:63007:in the seventeenth, the _chauffeurs_ [brigands] in the eighteenth. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:63008:hundred years ago, the nocturnal blow of the dagger emerged thence, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63009:pickpocket in danger slipped thither; the forest had its cave, Paris
tests/les_miserables.txt:63010:had its sewer. Vagrancy, that Gallic _picareria_, accepted the sewer as
tests/les_miserables.txt:63011:the adjunct of the Cour des Miracles, and at evening, it returned
tests/les_miserables.txt:63012:thither, fierce and sly, through the Maubuée outlet, as into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63013:bed-chamber.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63016:[Empty-Pocket] or the Rue Coupe-Gorge [Cut-Throat], for the scene of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63017:their daily labor, should have for their domicile by night the culvert
tests/les_miserables.txt:63018:of the Chemin-Vert, or the catch basin of Hurepoix. Hence a throng of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63019:souvenirs. All sorts of phantoms haunt these long, solitary corridors;
tests/les_miserables.txt:63020:everywhere is putrescence and miasma; here and there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:63021:breathing-holes, where Villon within converses with Rabelais without.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63023:The sewer in ancient Paris is the rendezvous of all exhaustions and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63024:all attempts. Political economy therein spies a detritus, social
tests/les_miserables.txt:63027:The sewer is the conscience of the city. Everything there converges and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63028:confronts everything else. In that livid spot there are shades, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:63029:there are no longer any secrets. Each thing bears its true form, or at
tests/les_miserables.txt:63032:of Basil is to be found there, but one beholds its cardboard and its
tests/les_miserables.txt:63033:strings and the inside as well as the outside, and it is accentuated by
tests/les_miserables.txt:63034:honest mud. Scapin’s false nose is its next-door neighbor. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63035:uncleannesses of civilization, once past their use, fall into this
tests/les_miserables.txt:63036:trench of truth, where the immense social sliding ends. They are there
tests/les_miserables.txt:63038:confession. There, no more false appearances, no plastering over is
tests/les_miserables.txt:63040:all illusions and mirages, there is nothing more except what really
tests/les_miserables.txt:63041:exists, presenting the sinister form of that which is coming to an end.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63042:There, the bottom of a bottle indicates drunkenness, a basket-handle
tests/les_miserables.txt:63043:tells a tale of domesticity; there the core of an apple which has
tests/les_miserables.txt:63044:entertained literary opinions becomes an apple-core once more; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63045:effigy on the big sou becomes frankly covered with verdigris, Caiphas’
tests/les_miserables.txt:63046:spittle meets Falstaff’s puking, the louis-d’or which comes from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63047:gaming-house jostles the nail whence hangs the rope’s end of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63048:suicide. A livid fœtus rolls along, enveloped in the spangles which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63049:danced at the Opera last Shrove-Tuesday, a cap which has pronounced
tests/les_miserables.txt:63050:judgment on men wallows beside a mass of rottenness which was formerly
tests/les_miserables.txt:63051:Margoton’s petticoat; it is more than fraternization, it is equivalent
tests/les_miserables.txt:63052:to addressing each other as _thou_. All which was formerly rouged, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:63053:washed free. The last veil is torn away. A sewer is a cynic. It tells
tests/les_miserables.txt:63056:The sincerity of foulness pleases us, and rests the soul. When one has
tests/les_miserables.txt:63057:passed one’s time in enduring upon earth the spectacle of the great
tests/les_miserables.txt:63058:airs which reasons of state, the oath, political sagacity, human
tests/les_miserables.txt:63059:justice, professional probity, the austerities of situation,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63060:incorruptible robes all assume, it solaces one to enter a sewer and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63061:behold the mire which befits it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63063:This is instructive at the same time. We have just said that history
tests/les_miserables.txt:63065:drop by drop, between the paving-stones. Great public assassinations,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63066:political and religious butcheries, traverse this underground passage
tests/les_miserables.txt:63067:of civilization, and thrust their corpses there. For the eye of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63068:thinker, all historic murderers are to be found there, in that hideous
tests/les_miserables.txt:63069:penumbra, on their knees, with a scrap of their winding-sheet for an
tests/les_miserables.txt:63072:Richelieu is there with Louis XIII., Louvois is there, Letellier is
tests/les_miserables.txt:63073:there, Hébert and Maillard are there, scratching the stones, and trying
tests/les_miserables.txt:63074:to make the traces of their actions disappear. Beneath these vaults one
tests/les_miserables.txt:63075:hears the brooms of spectres. One there breathes the enormous fetidness
tests/les_miserables.txt:63076:of social catastrophes. One beholds reddish reflections in the corners.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63077:There flows a terrible stream, in which bloody hands have been washed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63079:The social observer should enter these shadows. They form a part of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:63080:laboratory. Philosophy is the microscope of the thought. Everything
tests/les_miserables.txt:63081:desires to flee from it, but nothing escapes it. Tergiversation is
tests/les_miserables.txt:63083:shameful side. Philosophy pursues with its glance, probes the evil, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63084:does not permit it to escape into nothingness. In the obliteration of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63085:things which disappear, in the watching of things which vanish, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:63086:recognizes all. It reconstructs the purple from the rag, and the woman
tests/les_miserables.txt:63087:from the scrap of her dress. From the cesspool, it reconstitutes the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63088:city; from mud, it reconstructs manners; from the potsherd it infers
tests/les_miserables.txt:63089:the amphora or the jug. By the imprint of a finger-nail on a piece of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63090:parchment, it recognizes the difference which separates the Jewry of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63091:the Judengasse from the Jewry of the Ghetto. It re-discovers in what
tests/les_miserables.txt:63092:remains that which has been, good, evil, the true, the blood-stain of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63093:the palace, the ink-blot of the cavern, the drop of sweat from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63094:brothel, trials undergone, temptations welcomed, orgies cast forth, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63095:turn which characters have taken as they became abased, the trace of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63096:prostitution in souls of which their grossness rendered them capable,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63107:century, Henri II. attempted a bore, which failed. Not a hundred years
tests/les_miserables.txt:63108:ago, the cesspool, Mercier attests the fact, was abandoned to itself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63111:Such was this ancient Paris, delivered over to quarrels, to indecision,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63113:showed how understanding comes to cities. But in the good, old times,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63114:the capital had not much head. It did not know how to manage its own
tests/les_miserables.txt:63115:affairs either morally or materially, and could not sweep out filth any
tests/les_miserables.txt:63116:better than it could abuses. Everything presented an obstacle,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63117:everything raised a question. The sewer, for example, was refractory to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63118:every itinerary. One could no more find one’s bearings in the sewer
tests/les_miserables.txt:63119:than one could understand one’s position in the city; above the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63120:unintelligible, below the inextricable; beneath the confusion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63121:tongues there reigned the confusion of caverns; Dædalus backed up
tests/les_miserables.txt:63126:occurred, infamous to relate, inundations of the sewer. At times, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:63127:stomach of civilization digested badly, the cesspool flowed back into
tests/les_miserables.txt:63128:the throat of the city, and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63129:These resemblances of the sewer to remorse had their good points; they
tests/les_miserables.txt:63130:were warnings; very badly accepted, however; the city waxed indignant
tests/les_miserables.txt:63131:at the audacity of its mire, and did not admit that the filth should
tests/les_miserables.txt:63134:The inundation of 1802 is one of the actual memories of Parisians of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63135:the age of eighty. The mud spread in cross-form over the Place des
tests/les_miserables.txt:63136:Victoires, where stands the statue of Louis XIV.; it entered the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:63139:Pierre-à-Poisson through the sewer de la Sonnerie, the Rue Popincourt,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63141:the sewer of the Rue de Lappe; it covered the drain of the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:63142:Champs-Élysées to the height of thirty-five centimetres; and, to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63143:South, through the vent of the Seine, performing its functions in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63144:inverse sense, it penetrated the Rue Mazarine, the Rue de l’Échaudé,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63145:and the Rue des Marais, where it stopped at a distance of one hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:63146:and nine metres, a few paces distant from the house in which Racine had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63147:lived, respecting, in the seventeenth century, the poet more than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63151:spread out over a stretch two hundred and thirty-eight metres in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63154:At the beginning of this century, the sewer of Paris was still a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63155:mysterious place. Mud can never enjoy a good fame; but in this case its
tests/les_miserables.txt:63156:evil renown reached the verge of the terrible. Paris knew, in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63157:confused way, that she had under her a terrible cavern. People talked
tests/les_miserables.txt:63158:of it as of that monstrous bed of Thebes in which swarmed centipedes
tests/les_miserables.txt:63159:fifteen long feet in length, and which might have served Behemoth for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63161:certain well-known points. We were then very near the epoch when the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63162:scavenger’s carts, from the summit of which Sainte-Foix fraternized
tests/les_miserables.txt:63163:with the Marquis de Créqui, discharged their loads directly into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63164:sewer. As for cleaning out,—that function was entrusted to the pouring
tests/les_miserables.txt:63165:rains which encumbered rather than swept away. Rome left some poetry to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63166:her sewer, and called it the Gemoniæ; Paris insulted hers, and entitled
tests/les_miserables.txt:63167:it the Polypus-Hole. Science and superstition were in accord, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63169:legend. The goblin was developed under the fetid covering of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63170:Mouffetard sewer; the corpses of the Marmousets had been cast into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63172:fever of 1685 to the great hiatus of the sewer of the Marais, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63175:la Mortellerie was celebrated for the pestilences which had their
tests/les_miserables.txt:63176:source there; with its grating of iron, with points simulating a row of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63179:sink with some indescribably hideous intermixture of the infinite. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:63181:exploring these leprous regions did not even occur to the police. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:63182:try that unknown thing, to cast the plummet into that shadow, to set
tests/les_miserables.txt:63183:out on a voyage of discovery in that abyss—who would have dared? It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:63184:alarming. Nevertheless, some one did present himself. The cesspool had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63187:One day, in 1805, during one of the rare apparitions which the Emperor
tests/les_miserables.txt:63188:made in Paris, the Minister of the Interior, some Decrès or Crétet or
tests/les_miserables.txt:63189:other, came to the master’s intimate levee. In the Carrousel there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:63190:audible the clanking of swords of all those extraordinary soldiers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63191:the great Republic, and of the great Empire; then Napoleon’s door was
tests/les_miserables.txt:63192:blocked with heroes; men from the Rhine, from the Escaut, from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63193:Adige, and from the Nile; companions of Joubert, of Desaix, of Marceau,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63194:of Hoche, of Kléber; the aérostiers of Fleurus, the grenadiers of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63195:Mayence, the pontoon-builders of Genoa, hussars whom the Pyramids had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63196:looked down upon, artillerists whom Junot’s cannon-ball had spattered
tests/les_miserables.txt:63197:with mud, cuirassiers who had taken by assault the fleet lying at
tests/les_miserables.txt:63198:anchor in the Zuyderzee; some had followed Bonaparte upon the bridge of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63199:Lodi, others had accompanied Murat in the trenches of Mantua, others
tests/les_miserables.txt:63200:had preceded Lannes in the hollow road of Montebello. The whole army of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63201:that day was present there, in the court-yard of the Tuileries,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63203:repose; and that was the splendid epoch when the grand army had Marengo
tests/les_miserables.txt:63219:The visit took place. It was a formidable campaign; a nocturnal battle
tests/les_miserables.txt:63220:against pestilence and suffocation. It was, at the same time, a voyage
tests/les_miserables.txt:63221:of discovery. One of the survivors of this expedition, an intelligent
tests/les_miserables.txt:63222:workingman, who was very young at the time, related curious details
tests/les_miserables.txt:63223:with regard to it, several years ago, which Bruneseau thought himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:63224:obliged to omit in his report to the prefect of police, as unworthy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63225:official style. The processes of disinfection were, at that epoch,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63226:extremely rudimentary. Hardly had Bruneseau crossed the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:63227:articulations of that subterranean network, when eight laborers out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63228:the twenty refused to go any further. The operation was complicated;
tests/les_miserables.txt:63229:the visit entailed the necessity of cleaning; hence it was necessary to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63230:cleanse and at the same time, to proceed; to note the entrances of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63231:water, to count the gratings and the vents, to lay out in detail the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63232:branches, to indicate the currents at the point where they parted, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63233:define the respective bounds of the divers basins, to sound the small
tests/les_miserables.txt:63234:sewers grafted on the principal sewer, to measure the height under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63235:key-stone of each drain, and the width, at the spring of the vaults as
tests/les_miserables.txt:63237:regard to the level of each water-entrance, either of the bottom of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63238:arch, or on the soil of the street. They advanced with toil. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:63240:fainting sewerman was carried out. At certain points, there were
tests/les_miserables.txt:63241:precipices. The soil had given away, the pavement had crumbled, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63242:sewer had changed into a bottomless well; they found nothing solid; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63243:man disappeared suddenly; they had great difficulty in getting him out
tests/les_miserables.txt:63244:again. On the advice of Fourcroy, they lighted large cages filled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:63245:tow steeped in resin, from time to time, in spots which had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:63246:sufficiently disinfected. In some places, the wall was covered with
tests/les_miserables.txt:63250:Bruneseau, in his exploration, proceeded down hill. At the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63251:separation of the two water-conduits of the Grand-Hurleur, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:63252:deciphered upon a projecting stone the date of 1550; this stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:63253:indicated the limits where Philibert Delorme, charged by Henri II. with
tests/les_miserables.txt:63255:the mark of the sixteenth century on the sewer; Bruneseau found the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63256:handiwork of the seventeenth century once more in the Ponceau drain of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63258:handiwork of the eighteenth in the western section of the collecting
tests/les_miserables.txt:63259:canal, walled and vaulted in 1740. These two vaults, especially the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63260:less ancient, that of 1740, were more cracked and decrepit than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63261:masonry of the belt sewer, which dated from 1412, an epoch when the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63263:Grand Sewer of Paris, an advancement analogous to that of a peasant who
tests/les_miserables.txt:63264:should become first _valet de chambre_ to the King; something like
tests/les_miserables.txt:63267:Here and there, particularly beneath the Court-House, they thought they
tests/les_miserables.txt:63268:recognized the hollows of ancient dungeons, excavated in the very sewer
tests/les_miserables.txt:63269:itself. Hideous _in-pace_. An iron neck-collar was hanging in one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63270:these cells. They walled them all up. Some of their finds were
tests/les_miserables.txt:63272:disappeared from the Jardin des Plantes in 1800, a disappearance
tests/les_miserables.txt:63273:probably connected with the famous and indisputable apparition of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63275:century. The poor devil had ended by drowning himself in the sewer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63277:Beneath this long, arched drain which terminated at the Arche-Marion, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63278:perfectly preserved rag-picker’s basket excited the admiration of all
tests/les_miserables.txt:63279:connoisseurs. Everywhere, the mire, which the sewermen came to handle
tests/les_miserables.txt:63280:with intrepidity, abounded in precious objects, jewels of gold and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63281:silver, precious stones, coins. If a giant had filtered this cesspool,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63282:he would have had the riches of centuries in his lair. At the point
tests/les_miserables.txt:63283:where the two branches of the Rue du Temple and of the Rue Sainte-Avoye
tests/les_miserables.txt:63284:separate, they picked up a singular Huguenot medal in copper, bearing
tests/les_miserables.txt:63285:on one side the pig hooded with a cardinal’s hat, and on the other, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63288:The most surprising rencounter was at the entrance to the Grand Sewer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63289:This entrance had formerly been closed by a grating of which nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:63291:shapeless rag which, arrested there in its passage, no doubt, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63292:floated there in the darkness and finished its process of being torn
tests/les_miserables.txt:63293:apart. Bruneseau held his lantern close to this rag and examined it. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:63294:was of very fine batiste, and in one of the corners, less frayed than
tests/les_miserables.txt:63295:the rest, they made out a heraldic coronet and embroidered above these
tests/les_miserables.txt:63296:seven letters: LAVBESP. The crown was the coronet of a Marquis, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63297:seven letters signified _Laubespine_. They recognized the fact, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:63300:member of the household of the Comte d’Artois, in the capacity of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63301:physician to the Stables. From these love affairs, historically proved,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63303:At his death, as this was the only linen of any fineness which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63305:for the tomb in that swaddling-band in which the tragic Friend of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63307:rag where it hung; they did not put the finishing touch to it. Did this
tests/les_miserables.txt:63308:arise from scorn or from respect? Marat deserved both. And then,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63309:destiny was there sufficiently stamped to make them hesitate to touch
tests/les_miserables.txt:63310:it. Besides, the things of the sepulchre must be left in the spot which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63311:they select. In short, the relic was a strange one. A Marquise had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63313:end with the rats of the sewer. This chamber rag, of which Watteau
tests/les_miserables.txt:63314:would formerly have joyfully sketched every fold, had ended in becoming
tests/les_miserables.txt:63318:seven years, from 1805 to 1812. As he proceeded, Bruneseau drew,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63319:directed, and completed considerable works; in 1808 he lowered the arch
tests/les_miserables.txt:63320:of the Ponceau, and, everywhere creating new lines, he pushed the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63322:Innocents; in 1810, under the Rue Froidmanteau and under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63324:Rue du Mail, under the Rue de l’Écharpe, under the Place Royale; in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63326:same time, he had the whole network disinfected and rendered healthful.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63327:In the second year of his work, Bruneseau engaged the assistance of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:63330:It was thus that, at the beginning of the century, ancient society
tests/les_miserables.txt:63331:cleansed its double bottom, and performed the toilet of its sewer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63332:There was that much clean, at all events.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63334:Tortuous, cracked, unpaved, full of fissures, intersected by gullies,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63335:jolted by eccentric elbows, mounting and descending illogically, fetid,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63336:wild, fierce, submerged in obscurity, with cicatrices on its pavements
tests/les_miserables.txt:63337:and scars on its walls, terrible,—such was, retrospectively viewed, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63338:antique sewer of Paris. Ramifications in every direction, crossings, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63339:trenches, branches, goose-feet, stars, as in military mines, cœcum,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63340:blind alleys, vaults lined with saltpetre, pestiferous pools, scabby
tests/les_miserables.txt:63341:sweats, on the walls, drops dripping from the ceilings, darkness;
tests/les_miserables.txt:63342:nothing could equal the horror of this old, waste crypt, the digestive
tests/les_miserables.txt:63343:apparatus of Babylon, a cavern, ditch, gulf pierced with streets, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63344:titanic mole-burrow, where the mind seems to behold that enormous blind
tests/les_miserables.txt:63345:mole, the past, prowling through the shadows, in the filth which has
tests/les_miserables.txt:63356:To-day the sewer is clean, cold, straight, correct. It almost realizes
tests/les_miserables.txt:63357:the ideal of what is understood in England by the word “respectable.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:63359:say as though it came out of a bandbox. It resembles a tradesman who
tests/les_miserables.txt:63360:has become a councillor of state. One can almost see distinctly there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63361:The mire there comports itself with decency. At first, one might
tests/les_miserables.txt:63362:readily mistake it for one of those subterranean corridors, which were
tests/les_miserables.txt:63363:so common in former days, and so useful in flights of monarchs and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63364:princes, in those good old times, “when the people loved their kings.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:63366:the classical rectilinear alexandrine which, driven out of poetry,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63367:appears to have taken refuge in architecture, seems mingled with all
tests/les_miserables.txt:63368:the stones of that long, dark and whitish vault; each outlet is an
tests/les_miserables.txt:63369:arcade; the Rue de Rivoli serves as pattern even in the sewer. However,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63370:if the geometrical line is in place anywhere, it is certainly in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63371:drainage trench of a great city. There, everything should be
tests/les_miserables.txt:63373:certain official aspect. The very police reports, of which it sometimes
tests/les_miserables.txt:63374:forms the subject, no longer are wanting in respect towards it. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:63375:words which characterize it in administrative language are sonorous and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63376:dignified. What used to be called a gut is now called a gallery; what
tests/les_miserables.txt:63377:used to be called a hole is now called a surveying orifice. Villon
tests/les_miserables.txt:63378:would no longer meet with his ancient temporary provisional lodging.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63379:This network of cellars has its immemorial population of prowlers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63383:are they with their subterranean palace. The cesspool no longer retains
tests/les_miserables.txt:63384:anything of its primitive ferocity. The rain, which in former days
tests/les_miserables.txt:63386:too much to it. Miasmas still inhabit it. It is more hypocritical than
tests/les_miserables.txt:63387:irreproachable. The prefecture of police and the commission of health
tests/les_miserables.txt:63388:have done their best. But, in spite of all the processes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63389:disinfection, it exhales, a vague, suspicious odor like Tartuffe after
tests/les_miserables.txt:63390:confession.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63392:Let us confess, that, taking it all in all, this sweeping is a homage
tests/les_miserables.txt:63393:which the sewer pays to civilization, and as, from this point of view,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63394:Tartuffe’s conscience is a progress over the Augean stables, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:63395:certain that the sewers of Paris have been improved.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63397:It is more than progress; it is transmutation. Between the ancient and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63398:the present sewer there is a revolution. What has effected this
tests/les_miserables.txt:63410:The excavation of the sewer of Paris has been no slight task. The last
tests/les_miserables.txt:63411:ten centuries have toiled at it without being able to bring it to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63413:sewer, in fact, receives all the counter-shocks of the growth of Paris.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63415:thousand antennæ, which expands below as the city expands above. Every
tests/les_miserables.txt:63416:time that the city cuts a street, the sewer stretches out an arm. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:63417:old monarchy had constructed only twenty-three thousand three hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:63418:metres of sewers; that was where Paris stood in this respect on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63419:first of January, 1806. Beginning with this epoch, of which we shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:63420:shortly speak, the work was usefully and energetically resumed and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63421:prosecuted; Napoleon built—the figures are curious—four thousand eight
tests/les_miserables.txt:63424:Louis-Philippe, eighty-nine thousand and twenty; the Republic of 1848,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63428:leagues of sewers; the enormous entrails of Paris. An obscure
tests/les_miserables.txt:63429:ramification ever at work; a construction which is immense and ignored.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63432:than ten times what it was at the beginning of the century. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:63433:difficult to form any idea of all the perseverance and the efforts
tests/les_miserables.txt:63434:which have been required to bring this cesspool to the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63435:relative perfection in which it now is. It was with great difficulty
tests/les_miserables.txt:63436:that the ancient monarchical provostship and, during the last ten years
tests/les_miserables.txt:63437:of the eighteenth century, the revolutionary mayoralty, had succeeded
tests/les_miserables.txt:63438:in perforating the five leagues of sewer which existed previous to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63439:1806. All sorts of obstacles hindered this operation, some peculiar to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63440:the soil, others inherent in the very prejudices of the laborious
tests/les_miserables.txt:63441:population of Paris. Paris is built upon a soil which is singularly
tests/les_miserables.txt:63442:rebellious to the pick, the hoe, the bore, and to human manipulation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63443:There is nothing more difficult to pierce and to penetrate than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63444:geological formation upon which is superposed the marvellous historical
tests/les_miserables.txt:63445:formation called Paris; as soon as work in any form whatsoever is begun
tests/les_miserables.txt:63446:and adventures upon this stretch of alluvium, subterranean resistances
tests/les_miserables.txt:63447:abound. There are liquid clays, springs, hard rocks, and those soft and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63448:deep quagmires which special science calls _moutardes_.59 The pick
tests/les_miserables.txt:63449:advances laboriously through the calcareous layers alternating with
tests/les_miserables.txt:63450:very slender threads of clay, and schistose beds in plates incrusted
tests/les_miserables.txt:63451:with oyster-shells, the contemporaries of the pre-Adamite oceans.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63454:rolls down with the fury of a cataract, breaking the stoutest
tests/les_miserables.txt:63455:supporting beams like glass. Quite recently, at Villette, when it
tests/les_miserables.txt:63456:became necessary to pass the collecting sewer under the Saint-Martin
tests/les_miserables.txt:63457:canal without interrupting navigation or emptying the canal, a fissure
tests/les_miserables.txt:63458:appeared in the basin of the canal, water suddenly became abundant in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63459:the subterranean tunnel, which was beyond the power of the pumping
tests/les_miserables.txt:63460:engines; it was necessary to send a diver to explore the fissure which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63461:had been made in the narrow entrance of the grand basin, and it was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:63462:without great difficulty that it was stopped up. Elsewhere near the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63463:Seine, and even at a considerable distance from the river, as for
tests/les_miserables.txt:63464:instance, at Belleville, Grand-Rue and Lumière Passage, quicksands are
tests/les_miserables.txt:63465:encountered in which one sticks fast, and in which a man sinks visibly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63466:Add suffocation by miasmas, burial by slides, and sudden crumbling of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63467:the earth. Add the typhus, with which the workmen become slowly
tests/les_miserables.txt:63468:impregnated. In our own day, after having excavated the gallery of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63469:Clichy, with a banquette to receive the principal water-conduit of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63470:Ourcq, a piece of work which was executed in a trench ten metres deep;
tests/les_miserables.txt:63472:excavations often putrid, and of shoring up, vaulted the Bièvre from
tests/les_miserables.txt:63475:an outlet for that river-like pool nine hectares in extent, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63476:crouched near the Barrière des Martyrs, after having, let us state,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63477:constructed the line of sewers from the Barrière Blanche to the road of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63480:subterranean sewer in the Rue Barre-du-Bec, without a trench, six
tests/les_miserables.txt:63481:metres below the surface, the superintendent, Monnot, died. After
tests/les_miserables.txt:63483:city, from the Rue Traversière-Saint-Antoine to the Rue de l’Ourcine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63485:rain by means of the branch of the Arbalète, after having built the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63486:Saint-Georges sewer, on rock and concrete in the fluid sands, after
tests/les_miserables.txt:63487:having directed the formidable lowering of the flooring of the vault
tests/les_miserables.txt:63488:timber in the Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth branch, Duleau the engineer died.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63489:There are no bulletins for such acts of bravery as these, which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:63494:Bruneseau had given the impulse, but the cholera was required to bring
tests/les_miserables.txt:63495:about the vast reconstruction which took place later on. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:63497:called the Grand Canal, as in Venice, still stood stagnating uncovered
tests/les_miserables.txt:63498:to the sky, in the Rue des Gourdes. It was only in 1821 that the city
tests/les_miserables.txt:63499:of Paris found in its pocket the two hundred and sixty-thousand eighty
tests/les_miserables.txt:63500:francs and six centimes required for covering this mass of filth. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:63502:with their discharging mouths, their apparatus, their cesspools, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63503:their depuratory branches, only date from 1836. The intestinal sewer of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63505:extended more than tenfold within the last quarter of a century.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63507:Thirty years ago, at the epoch of the insurrection of the 5th and 6th
tests/les_miserables.txt:63508:of June, it was still, in many localities, nearly the same ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:63509:sewer. A very great number of streets which are now convex were then
tests/les_miserables.txt:63510:sunken causeways. At the end of a slope, where the tributaries of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63511:street or crossroads ended, there were often to be seen large, square
tests/les_miserables.txt:63513:throng, gleamed dangerous and slippery for vehicles, and caused horses
tests/les_miserables.txt:63514:to fall. The official language of the Roads and Bridges gave to these
tests/les_miserables.txt:63519:Notre-Dame de Nazareth, the Rue Folie-Méricourt, the Quai aux Fleurs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63520:the Rue du Petit-Musc, the Rue du Normandie, the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63522:des-Victoires, the Faubourg Montmartre, the Rue Grange-Batelière, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63523:the Champs-Élysées, the Rue Jacob, the Rue de Tournon, the ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:63524:gothic sewer still cynically displayed its maw. It consisted of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63525:enormous voids of stone catch-basins sometimes surrounded by stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:63528:Paris in 1806 still had nearly the same sewers numerically as stated in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63533:galleries were constructed every year, in masonry, of small stones,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63534:with hydraulic mortar which hardens under water, on a cement
tests/les_miserables.txt:63535:foundation. At two hundred francs the metre, the sixty leagues of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63538:In addition to the economic progress which we have indicated at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63539:beginning, grave problems of public hygiene are connected with that
tests/les_miserables.txt:63542:Paris is the centre of two sheets, a sheet of water and a sheet of air.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63544:already sounded by two bores, is furnished by the layer of green clay
tests/les_miserables.txt:63545:situated between the chalk and the Jurassic lime-stone; this layer may
tests/les_miserables.txt:63546:be represented by a disk five and twenty leagues in circumference; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63550:is healthy, it comes from heaven in the first place and next from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63551:earth; the sheet of air is unhealthy, it comes from the sewer. All the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63552:miasms of the cesspool are mingled with the breath of the city; hence
tests/les_miserables.txt:63554:scientifically proved, is purer than the air taken from above Paris. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:63555:a given time, with the aid of progress, mechanisms become perfected,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63556:and as light increases, the sheet of water will be employed to purify
tests/les_miserables.txt:63560:Through this simple act, the entire social community will experience a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63565:We might say that, for ten centuries, the cesspool has been the disease
tests/les_miserables.txt:63566:of Paris. The sewer is the blemish which Paris has in her blood. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:63567:popular instinct has never been deceived in it. The occupation of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63569:the people, as the occupation of knacker, which was so long held in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63570:horror and handed over to the executioner. High wages were necessary to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63571:induce a mason to disappear in that fetid mine; the ladder of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63572:cesspool cleaner hesitated to plunge into it; it was said, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63573:proverbial form: “to descend into the sewer is to enter the grave;” and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63574:all sorts of hideous legends, as we have said, covered this colossal
tests/les_miserables.txt:63575:sink with terror; a dread sink-hole which bears the traces of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63577:be found vestiges of all cataclysms from the shells of the Deluge to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63593:Still another resemblance between Paris and the sea. As in the ocean,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63596:The transition was an unheard-of one. In the very heart of the city,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63597:Jean Valjean had escaped from the city, and, in the twinkling of an
tests/les_miserables.txt:63598:eye, in the time required to lift the cover and to replace it, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63599:passed from broad daylight to complete obscurity, from midday to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63600:midnight, from tumult to silence, from the whirlwind of thunders to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63601:stagnation of the tomb, and, by a vicissitude far more tremendous even
tests/les_miserables.txt:63602:than that of the Rue Polonceau, from the most extreme peril to the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:63603:absolute obscurity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63605:An abrupt fall into a cavern; a disappearance into the secret trap-door
tests/les_miserables.txt:63607:sort of sepulchre where there was life, was a strange instant. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:63608:remained for several seconds as though bewildered; listening,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63610:Celestial goodness had, in a manner, captured him by treachery.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63611:Adorable ambuscades of providence!
tests/les_miserables.txt:63614:whether that which he was carrying in that grave was a living being or
tests/les_miserables.txt:63615:a dead corpse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63617:His first sensation was one of blindness. All of a sudden, he could see
tests/les_miserables.txt:63618:nothing. It seemed to him too, that, in one instant, he had become
tests/les_miserables.txt:63619:deaf. He no longer heard anything. The frantic storm of murder which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63620:had been let loose a few feet above his head did not reach him, thanks
tests/les_miserables.txt:63621:to the thickness of the earth which separated him from it, as we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:63622:said, otherwise than faintly and indistinctly, and like a rumbling, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63625:touched the walls on both sides, and perceived that the passage was
tests/les_miserables.txt:63626:narrow; he slipped, and thus perceived that the pavement was wet. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:63627:cautiously put forward one foot, fearing a hole, a sink, some gulf; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:63628:discovered that the paving continued. A gust of fetidness informed him
tests/les_miserables.txt:63629:of the place in which he stood.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63632:light fell through the man-hole through which he had descended, and his
tests/les_miserables.txt:63633:eyes became accustomed to this cavern. He began to distinguish
tests/les_miserables.txt:63634:something. The passage in which he had burrowed—no other word can
tests/les_miserables.txt:63636:those blind alleys, which the special jargon terms branches. In front
tests/les_miserables.txt:63638:air-hole died out ten or twelve paces from the point where Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:63639:stood, and barely cast a wan pallor on a few metres of the damp walls
tests/les_miserables.txt:63641:seemed horrible, an entrance into it appeared like an engulfment. A man
tests/les_miserables.txt:63642:could, however, plunge into that wall of fog and it was necessary so to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63643:do. Haste was even requisite. It occurred to Jean Valjean that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63644:grating which he had caught sight of under the flag-stones might also
tests/les_miserables.txt:63645:catch the eye of the soldiery, and that everything hung upon this
tests/les_miserables.txt:63646:chance. They also might descend into that well and search it. There was
tests/les_miserables.txt:63648:picked him up again,—that is the real word for it,—placed him on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:63649:shoulders once more, and set out. He plunged resolutely into the gloom.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63651:The truth is, that they were less safe than Jean Valjean fancied.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63653:perchance. After the lightning-charged whirlwind of the combat, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63654:cavern of miasmas and traps; after chaos, the sewer. Jean Valjean had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63655:fallen from one circle of hell into another.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63657:When he had advanced fifty paces, he was obliged to halt. A problem
tests/les_miserables.txt:63658:presented itself. The passage terminated in another gut which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:63659:encountered across his path. There two ways presented themselves. Which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63661:he to find his bearings in that black labyrinth? This labyrinth, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63662:which we have already called the reader’s attention, has a clue, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63665:This Jean Valjean instantly comprehended.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63668:if he were to choose the path to the left and follow the slope, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:63671:would make his appearance in broad daylight on the most densely peopled
tests/les_miserables.txt:63672:spot in Paris. Perhaps he would come out on some man-hole at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63673:intersection of streets. Amazement of the passers-by at beholding two
tests/les_miserables.txt:63675:police, a call to arms of the neighboring post of guards. Thus they
tests/les_miserables.txt:63677:plunge into that labyrinth, to confide themselves to that black gloom,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63678:and to trust to Providence for the outcome.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63680:He ascended the incline, and turned to the right.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63683:air-hole disappeared, the curtain of obscurity fell upon him once more,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63684:and he became blind again. Nevertheless, he advanced as rapidly as
tests/les_miserables.txt:63685:possible. Marius’ two arms were passed round his neck, and the former’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:63687:groped along the wall with the other. Marius’ cheek touched his, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63688:clung there, bleeding. He felt a warm stream which came from Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:63689:trickling down upon him and making its way under his clothes. But a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63690:humid warmth near his ear, which the mouth of the wounded man touched,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63691:indicated respiration, and consequently, life. The passage along which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63692:Jean Valjean was now proceeding was not so narrow as the first. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:63693:Valjean walked through it with considerable difficulty. The rain of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63694:preceding day had not, as yet, entirely run off, and it created a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63695:little torrent in the centre of the bottom, and he was forced to hug
tests/les_miserables.txt:63698:Thus he proceeded in the gloom. He resembled the beings of the night
tests/les_miserables.txt:63703:eyes had become accustomed to the obscurity, some vague vision returned
tests/les_miserables.txt:63704:to him, and he began once more to gain a confused idea, now of the wall
tests/les_miserables.txt:63705:which he touched, now of the vault beneath which he was passing. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:63709:It was not easy to direct his course.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63711:The line of the sewer re-echoes, so to speak, the line of the streets
tests/les_miserables.txt:63712:which lie above it. There were then in Paris two thousand two hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:63714:branches which is called the sewer. The system of sewers existing at
tests/les_miserables.txt:63715:that epoch, placed end to end, would have given a length of eleven
tests/les_miserables.txt:63716:leagues. We have said above, that the actual network, thanks to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63717:special activity of the last thirty years, was no less than sixty
tests/les_miserables.txt:63720:Jean Valjean began by committing a blunder. He thought that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:63722:Under the Rue Saint-Denis there is an old stone sewer which dates from
tests/les_miserables.txt:63723:Louis XIII. and which runs straight to the collecting sewer, called the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63725:the ancient Cour des Miracles, and a single branch, the Saint-Martin
tests/les_miserables.txt:63726:sewer, whose four arms describe a cross. But the gut of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63727:Petite-Truanderie the entrance to which was in the vicinity of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63728:Corinthe wine-shop has never communicated with the sewer of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:63732:ancient network. Fortunately, Jean Valjean had left behind him the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63733:sewer of the markets whose geometrical plan presents the appearance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63734:a multitude of parrots’ roosts piled on top of each other; but he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63735:before him more than one embarrassing encounter and more than one
tests/les_miserables.txt:63736:street corner—for they are streets—presenting itself in the gloom like
tests/les_miserables.txt:63739:chaos of Ts and Zs under the Post-Office and under the rotunda of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63741:secondly, on his right, the curving corridor of the Rue du Cadran with
tests/les_miserables.txt:63742:its three teeth, which are also blind courts; thirdly, on his left, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63743:branch of the Mail, complicated, almost at its inception, with a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:63744:of fork, and proceeding from zig-zag to zig-zag until it ends in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63745:grand crypt of the outlet of the Louvre, truncated and ramified in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63746:every direction; and lastly, the blind alley of a passage of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:63747:des Jeûneurs, without counting little ducts here and there, before
tests/les_miserables.txt:63748:reaching the belt sewer, which alone could conduct him to some issue
tests/les_miserables.txt:63749:sufficiently distant to be safe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63752:would speedily have perceived, merely by feeling the wall, that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:63754:ancient stone, instead of the antique architecture, haughty and royal
tests/les_miserables.txt:63755:even in the sewer, with pavement and string courses of granite and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63756:mortar costing eight hundred livres the fathom, he would have felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:63757:under his hand contemporary cheapness, economical expedients, porous
tests/les_miserables.txt:63758:stone filled with mortar on a concrete foundation, which costs two
tests/les_miserables.txt:63759:hundred francs the metre, and the bourgeoise masonry known as _à petits
tests/les_miserables.txt:63762:He advanced with anxiety, but with calmness, seeing nothing, knowing
tests/les_miserables.txt:63763:nothing, buried in chance, that is to say, engulfed in providence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63765:By degrees, we will admit, a certain horror seized upon him. The gloom
tests/les_miserables.txt:63766:which enveloped him penetrated his spirit. He walked in an enigma. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:63767:aqueduct of the sewer is formidable; it interlaces in a dizzy fashion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63768:It is a melancholy thing to be caught in this Paris of shadows. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:63772:would that colossal subterranean sponge with its stone cavities, allow
tests/les_miserables.txt:63773:itself to be penetrated and pierced? should he there encounter some
tests/les_miserables.txt:63774:unexpected knot in the darkness? should he arrive at the inextricable
tests/les_miserables.txt:63779:form a precipice. Like the prophet, he was in the belly of the monster.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63781:All at once, he had a surprise. At the most unforeseen moment, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63782:without having ceased to walk in a straight line, he perceived that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:63783:was no longer ascending; the water of the rivulet was beating against
tests/les_miserables.txt:63785:descending. Why? Was he about to arrive suddenly at the Seine? This
tests/les_miserables.txt:63787:He continued to advance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63789:It was not towards the Seine that he was proceeding. The ridge which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63791:into the Seine and the other into the Grand Sewer. The crest of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:63792:ridge which determines the division of the waters describes a very
tests/les_miserables.txt:63793:capricious line. The culminating point, which is the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63794:separation of the currents, is in the Sainte-Avoye sewer, beyond the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63795:Rue Michel-le-Comte, in the sewer of the Louvre, near the boulevards,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63796:and in the Montmartre sewer, near the Halles. It was this culminating
tests/les_miserables.txt:63797:point that Jean Valjean had reached. He was directing his course
tests/les_miserables.txt:63801:Every time that he encountered a branch, he felt of its angles, and if
tests/les_miserables.txt:63802:he found that the opening which presented itself was smaller than the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63803:passage in which he was, he did not enter but continued his route,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63805:alley, and could only lead him further from his goal, that is to say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63806:the outlet. Thus he avoided the quadruple trap which was set for him in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63807:the darkness by the four labyrinths which we have just enumerated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63809:At a certain moment, he perceived that he was emerging from beneath the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63810:Paris which was petrified by the uprising, where the barricades had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63811:suppressed circulation, and that he was entering beneath the living and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63813:but continuous. It was the rumbling of vehicles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63815:He had been walking for about half an hour, at least according to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63816:calculation which he made in his own mind, and he had not yet thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:63817:of rest; he had merely changed the hand with which he was holding
tests/les_miserables.txt:63821:All at once, he saw his shadow in front of him. It was outlined on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63822:faint, almost indistinct reddish glow, which vaguely empurpled the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63824:right and to his left the two viscous walls of the passage. Stupefied,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63827:Behind him, in the portion of the passage which he had just passed
tests/les_miserables.txt:63828:through, at a distance which appeared to him immense, piercing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63829:dense obscurity, flamed a sort of horrible star which had the air of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63832:It was the gloomy star of the police which was rising in the sewer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63835:confused way, black, upright, indistinct, horrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63845:refuge, and Prefect Gisquet was to search occult Paris while General
tests/les_miserables.txt:63846:Bugeaud swept public Paris; a double and connected operation which
tests/les_miserables.txt:63847:exacted a double strategy on the part of the public force, represented
tests/les_miserables.txt:63848:above by the army and below by the police. Three squads of agents and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63850:right bank, the second on the left bank, the third in the city. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:63851:agents of police were armed with carabines, with bludgeons, swords and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63854:That which was directed at Jean Valjean at that moment, was the lantern
tests/les_miserables.txt:63857:This patrol had just visited the curving gallery and the three blind
tests/les_miserables.txt:63858:alleys which lie beneath the Rue du Cadran. While they were passing
tests/les_miserables.txt:63860:had encountered on his path the entrance to the gallery, had perceived
tests/les_miserables.txt:63861:that it was narrower than the principal passage and had not penetrated
tests/les_miserables.txt:63862:thither. He had passed on. The police, on emerging from the gallery du
tests/les_miserables.txt:63863:Cadran, had fancied that they heard the sound of footsteps in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63864:direction of the belt sewer. They were, in fact, the steps of Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:63865:Valjean. The sergeant in command of the patrol had raised his lantern,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63866:and the squad had begun to gaze into the mist in the direction whence
tests/les_miserables.txt:63867:the sound proceeded.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63869:This was an indescribable moment for Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63873:darkness of the place. He hugged the wall and halted. Moreover, he did
tests/les_miserables.txt:63874:not understand what it was that was moving behind him. The lack of
tests/les_miserables.txt:63875:sleep and food, and his emotions had caused him also to pass into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63877:What was it? He did not comprehend.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63879:Jean Valjean having paused, the sound ceased.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63882:nothing. They held a consultation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63884:There existed at that epoch at this point of the Montmartre sewer a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63885:sort of crossroads called _de service_, which was afterwards
tests/les_miserables.txt:63886:suppressed, on account of the little interior lake which formed there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63887:swallowing up the torrent of rain in heavy storms. The patrol could
tests/les_miserables.txt:63888:form a cluster in this open space. Jean Valjean saw these spectres form
tests/les_miserables.txt:63889:a sort of circle. These bull-dogs’ heads approached each other closely
tests/les_miserables.txt:63892:The result of this council held by the watch dogs was, that they had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63896:anything to do, and any “bousingot” to track out, it was in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:63900:bousingot formed the interim between the word jacobin, which had become
tests/les_miserables.txt:63901:obsolete, and the word demagogue which has since rendered such
tests/les_miserables.txt:63902:excellent service.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63907:If it had occurred to them to separate into two squads, and to go in
tests/les_miserables.txt:63908:both directions, Jean Valjean would have been captured. All hung on
tests/les_miserables.txt:63909:that thread. It is probable that the instructions of the prefecture,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63910:foreseeing a possibility of combat and insurgents in force, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:63911:forbidden the patrol to part company. The patrol resumed its march,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63913:perceived nothing, except the eclipse of the lantern which suddenly
tests/les_miserables.txt:63916:Before taking his departure, the sergeant, in order to acquit his
tests/les_miserables.txt:63917:policeman’s conscience, discharged his gun in the direction of Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:63918:Valjean. The detonation rolled from echo to echo in the crypt, like the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63919:rumbling of that titanic entrail. A bit of plaster which fell into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63920:stream and splashed up the water a few paces away from Jean Valjean,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63921:warned him that the ball had struck the arch over his head.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63924:gradually dying away as they retreated to a greater distance; the group
tests/les_miserables.txt:63925:of black forms vanished, a glimmer of light oscillated and floated,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63926:communicating to the vault a reddish glow which grew fainter, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:63927:disappeared; the silence became profound once more, the obscurity
tests/les_miserables.txt:63928:became complete, blindness and deafness resumed possession of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63930:long time leaning with his back against the wall, with straining ears,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63931:and dilated pupils, watching the disappearance of that phantom patrol.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63939:This justice must be rendered to the police of that period, that even
tests/les_miserables.txt:63940:in the most serious public junctures, it imperturbably fulfilled its
tests/les_miserables.txt:63941:duties connected with the sewers and surveillance. A revolt was, in its
tests/les_miserables.txt:63942:eyes, no pretext for allowing malefactors to take the bit in their own
tests/les_miserables.txt:63943:mouths, and for neglecting society for the reason that the government
tests/les_miserables.txt:63944:was in peril. The ordinary service was performed correctly in company
tests/les_miserables.txt:63945:with the extraordinary service, and was not troubled by the latter. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:63946:the midst of an incalculable political event already begun, under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63947:pressure of a possible revolution, a police agent, “spun” a thief
tests/les_miserables.txt:63948:without allowing himself to be distracted by insurrection and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63949:barricades.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63951:It was something precisely parallel which took place on the afternoon
tests/les_miserables.txt:63955:There is no longer any bank there now. The aspect of the locality has
tests/les_miserables.txt:63956:changed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63958:On that bank, two men, separated by a certain distance, seemed to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:63959:watching each other while mutually avoiding each other. The one who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:63960:in advance was trying to get away, the one in the rear was trying to
tests/les_miserables.txt:63963:It was like a game of checkers played at a distance and in silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63965:each of them feared by too much haste to make his partner redouble his
tests/les_miserables.txt:63966:pace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63969:purposely without wearing the air of doing so. The prey was crafty and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63972:The proper relations between the hunted pole-cat and the hunting dog
tests/les_miserables.txt:63973:were observed. The one who was seeking to escape had an insignificant
tests/les_miserables.txt:63974:mien and not an impressive appearance; the one who was seeking to seize
tests/les_miserables.txt:63975:him was rude of aspect, and must have been rude to encounter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63977:The first, conscious that he was the more feeble, avoided the second;
tests/les_miserables.txt:63978:but he avoided him in a manner which was deeply furious; any one who
tests/les_miserables.txt:63979:could have observed him would have discerned in his eyes the sombre
tests/les_miserables.txt:63980:hostility of flight, and all the menace that fear contains.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63983:nor a lighter-man was in the skiffs which were moored here and there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63985:It was not easy to see these two men, except from the quay opposite,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63986:and to any person who had scrutinized them at that distance, the man
tests/les_miserables.txt:63987:who was in advance would have appeared like a bristling, tattered, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:63988:equivocal being, who was uneasy and trembling beneath a ragged blouse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:63989:and the other like a classic and official personage, wearing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:63990:frock-coat of authority buttoned to the chin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63992:Perchance the reader might recognize these two men, if he were to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:63993:them closer at hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63995:What was the object of the second man?
tests/les_miserables.txt:63997:Probably to succeed in clothing the first more warmly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:63999:When a man clothed by the state pursues a man in rags, it is in order
tests/les_miserables.txt:64000:to make of him a man who is also clothed by the state. Only, the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:64001:question lies in the color. To be dressed in blue is glorious; to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:64006:It is probably some unpleasantness and some purple of this sort which
tests/les_miserables.txt:64010:was, judging from all appearances, in the hope of seeing him lead up to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64011:some significant meeting-place and to some group worth catching. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:64012:delicate operation is called “spinning.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:64015:What renders this conjecture entirely probable is that the buttoned-up
tests/les_miserables.txt:64016:man, on catching sight from the shore of a hackney-coach on the quay as
tests/les_miserables.txt:64018:understood, evidently recognized the person with whom he had to deal,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64020:a foot-pace. This was not observed by the slouching and tattered
tests/les_miserables.txt:64021:personage who was in advance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64023:The hackney-coach rolled along the trees of the Champs-Élysées. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:64024:bust of the driver, whip in hand, could be seen moving along above the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64027:One of the secret instructions of the police authorities to their
tests/les_miserables.txt:64028:agents contains this article: “Always have on hand a hackney-coach, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64029:case of emergency.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:64032:While these two men were manœuvring, each on his own side, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:64033:irreproachable strategy, they approached an inclined plane on the quay
tests/les_miserables.txt:64034:which descended to the shore, and which permitted cab-drivers arriving
tests/les_miserables.txt:64035:from Passy to come to the river and water their horses. This inclined
tests/les_miserables.txt:64039:It is probable that the man in the blouse had intended to ascend this
tests/les_miserables.txt:64040:inclined plane, with a view to making his escape into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64041:Champs-Élysées, a place ornamented with trees, but, in return, much
tests/les_miserables.txt:64042:infested with policemen, and where the other could easily exercise
tests/les_miserables.txt:64043:violence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64046:to Paris from Moret in 1824, by Colonel Brack, and designated as “the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64047:house of François I.” A guard house is situated close at hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64049:To the great surprise of his watcher, the man who was being tracked did
tests/les_miserables.txt:64050:not mount by the inclined plane for watering. He continued to advance
tests/les_miserables.txt:64053:His position was visibly becoming critical.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64057:Henceforth, there existed no means of ascending to the quay; there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64058:no other inclined plane, no staircase; and they were near the spot,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64060:bank, growing constantly narrower, ended in a slender tongue, and was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64061:lost in the water. There he would inevitably find himself blocked
tests/les_miserables.txt:64062:between the perpendicular wall on his right, the river on his left and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64066:a heap of rubbish six or seven feet in height, produced by some
tests/les_miserables.txt:64067:demolition or other. But did this man hope to conceal himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:64068:effectually behind that heap of rubbish, which one need but skirt? The
tests/les_miserables.txt:64069:expedient would have been puerile. He certainly was not dreaming of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64070:such a thing. The innocence of thieves does not extend to that point.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64072:The pile of rubbish formed a sort of projection at the water’s edge,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64073:which was prolonged in a promontory as far as the wall of the quay.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64076:round it, so that he ceased to be seen by the other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64078:The latter, as he did not see, could not be seen; he took advantage of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64079:this fact to abandon all dissimulation and to walk very rapidly. In a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64080:few moments, he had reached the rubbish heap and passed round it. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:64084:Total eclipse of the man in the blouse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64086:The shore, beginning with the rubbish heap, was only about thirty paces
tests/les_miserables.txt:64087:long, then it plunged into the water which beat against the wall of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64088:quay. The fugitive could not have thrown himself into the Seine without
tests/les_miserables.txt:64089:being seen by the man who was following him. What had become of him?
tests/les_miserables.txt:64091:The man in the buttoned-up coat walked to the extremity of the shore,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64092:and remained there in thought for a moment, his fists clenched, his
tests/les_miserables.txt:64093:eyes searching. All at once he smote his brow. He had just perceived,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64094:at the point where the land came to an end and the water began, a large
tests/les_miserables.txt:64095:iron grating, low, arched, garnished with a heavy lock and with three
tests/les_miserables.txt:64096:massive hinges. This grating, a sort of door pierced at the base of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64097:quay, opened on the river as well as on the shore. A blackish stream
tests/les_miserables.txt:64098:passed under it. This stream discharged into the Seine.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64100:Beyond the heavy, rusty iron bars, a sort of dark and vaulted corridor
tests/les_miserables.txt:64101:could be descried. The man folded his arms and stared at the grating
tests/les_miserables.txt:64102:with an air of reproach.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64104:As this gaze did not suffice, he tried to thrust it aside; he shook it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64106:although no sound had been heard, a singular circumstance in so rusty a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64107:grating; but it is certain that it had been closed again. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:64108:indicated that the man before whom that door had just opened had not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64111:This evidence suddenly burst upon the mind of the man who was trying to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64112:move the grating, and evoked from him this indignant ejaculation:
tests/les_miserables.txt:64114:“That is too much! A government key!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:64117:Then, immediately regaining his composure, he expressed a whole world
tests/les_miserables.txt:64118:of interior ideas by this outburst of monosyllables accented almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:64119:ironically: “Come! Come! Come! Come!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:64123:see the man emerge or other men enter, he posted himself on the watch
tests/les_miserables.txt:64126:The hackney-coach, which regulated all its movements on his, had, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64127:its turn, halted on the quay above him, close to the parapet. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:64128:coachman, foreseeing a prolonged wait, encased his horses’ muzzles in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64129:the bag of oats which is damp at the bottom, and which is so familiar
tests/les_miserables.txt:64132:their heads, before they pursued their way, to take a momentary glance
tests/les_miserables.txt:64133:at these two motionless items in the landscape, the man on the shore,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64134:the carriage on the quay.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64142:Jean Valjean had resumed his march and had not again paused.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64144:This march became more and more laborious. The level of these vaults
tests/les_miserables.txt:64145:varies; the average height is about five feet, six inches, and has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:64146:calculated for the stature of a man; Jean Valjean was forced to bend
tests/les_miserables.txt:64148:had to bend, then to rise, and to feel incessantly of the wall. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:64149:moisture of the stones, and the viscous nature of the timber framework
tests/les_miserables.txt:64150:furnished but poor supports to which to cling, either for hand or foot.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64151:He stumbled along in the hideous dung-heap of the city. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:64154:of the moon; all the rest was mist, miasma, opaqueness, blackness. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:64155:Valjean was both hungry and thirsty; especially thirsty; and this, like
tests/les_miserables.txt:64156:the sea, was a place full of water where a man cannot drink. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:64157:strength, which was prodigious, as the reader knows, and which had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:64158:but little decreased by age, thanks to his chaste and sober life, began
tests/les_miserables.txt:64160:strength decreased, it made the weight of his burden increase. Marius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64162:Valjean held him in such a manner that his chest was not oppressed, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64163:so that respiration could proceed as well as possible. Between his legs
tests/les_miserables.txt:64165:such a degree that he bit him. From time to time, a breath of fresh air
tests/les_miserables.txt:64166:reached him through the vent-holes of the mouths of the sewer, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64169:It might have been three hours past midday when he reached the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64173:all at once, in a gallery where his outstretched hands could not reach
tests/les_miserables.txt:64174:the two walls, and beneath a vault which his head did not touch. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:64175:Grand Sewer is, in fact, eight feet wide and seven feet high.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64178:other subterranean galleries, that of the Rue de Provence, and that of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64179:the Abattoir, form a square. Between these four ways, a less sagacious
tests/les_miserables.txt:64180:man would have remained undecided. Jean Valjean selected the broadest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64181:that is to say, the belt-sewer. But here the question again came
tests/les_miserables.txt:64182:up—should he descend or ascend? He thought that the situation required
tests/les_miserables.txt:64184:he must descend. He turned to the left.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64187:belt-sewer has two outlets, the one in the direction of Bercy, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64188:other towards Passy, and that it is, as its name indicates, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64190:which is, it must be remembered, nothing else than the old brook of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64191:Ménilmontant, terminates, if one ascends it, in a blind sack, that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64192:to say, at its ancient point of departure which was its source, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64193:foot of the knoll of Ménilmontant. There is no direct communication
tests/les_miserables.txt:64194:with the branch which collects the waters of Paris beginning with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64195:Quartier Popincourt, and which falls into the Seine through the Amelot
tests/les_miserables.txt:64196:sewer above the ancient Isle Louviers. This branch, which completes the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64197:collecting sewer, is separated from it, under the Rue Ménilmontant
tests/les_miserables.txt:64198:itself, by a pile which marks the dividing point of the waters, between
tests/les_miserables.txt:64199:upstream and downstream. If Jean Valjean had ascended the gallery he
tests/les_miserables.txt:64201:fatigue, and in an expiring condition, in the gloom, at a wall. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:64204:In case of necessity, by retracing his steps a little way, and entering
tests/les_miserables.txt:64205:the passage of the Filles-du-Calvaire, on condition that he did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:64206:hesitate at the subterranean crossing of the Carrefour Boucherat, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64207:by taking the corridor Saint-Louis, then the Saint-Gilles gut on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64209:gallery, he might have reached the Amelot sewer, and thence, provided
tests/les_miserables.txt:64210:that he did not go astray in the sort of F which lies under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64213:with the enormous madrepore of the sewer in all its ramifications and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64215:that frightful drain which he was traversing; and had any one asked him
tests/les_miserables.txt:64219:His instinct served him well. To descend was, in fact, possible safety.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64221:He left on his right the two narrow passages which branch out in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64222:form of a claw under the Rue Laffitte and the Rue Saint-Georges and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64223:long, bifurcated corridor of the Chaussée d’Antin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64225:A little beyond an affluent, which was, probably, the Madeleine branch,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64228:vivid. Jean Valjean, with the gentleness of movement which a brother
tests/les_miserables.txt:64229:would exercise towards his wounded brother, deposited Marius on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64230:banquette of the sewer. Marius’ blood-stained face appeared under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64232:eyes were closed, his hair was plastered down on his temples like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64234:clot of blood had collected in the knot of his cravat; his limbs were
tests/les_miserables.txt:64235:cold, and blood was clotted at the corners of his mouth; his shirt had
tests/les_miserables.txt:64236:thrust itself into his wounds, the cloth of his coat was chafing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64241:flowing blood; then bending over Marius, who still lay unconscious and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64246:pockets, the roll which had been forgotten there on the preceding
tests/les_miserables.txt:64247:evening, and Marius’ pocketbook. He ate the roll and opened the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64248:pocketbook. On the first page he found the four lines written by
tests/les_miserables.txt:64249:Marius. The reader will recall them:
tests/les_miserables.txt:64251:“My name is Marius Pontmercy. Carry my body to my grandfather, M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64258:replaced the pocketbook in Marius’ pocket. He had eaten, his strength
tests/les_miserables.txt:64259:had returned to him; he took Marius up once more upon his back, placed
tests/les_miserables.txt:64260:the latter’s head carefully on his right shoulder, and resumed his
tests/les_miserables.txt:64261:descent of the sewer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64263:The Grand Sewer, directed according to the course of the valley of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64267:This torch of the names of the streets of Paris, with which we are
tests/les_miserables.txt:64268:illuminating for the reader Jean Valjean’s subterranean march, Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:64269:Valjean himself did not possess. Nothing told him what zone of the city
tests/les_miserables.txt:64271:the pools of light which he encountered from time to time indicated to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64273:would soon be over; and the rolling of vehicles overhead, having become
tests/les_miserables.txt:64274:intermittent instead of continuous, then having almost ceased, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:64275:concluded that he was no longer under central Paris, and that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64276:approaching some solitary region, in the vicinity of the outer
tests/les_miserables.txt:64279:Jean Valjean. Nevertheless, he continued to advance, groping his way in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64282:Suddenly this darkness became terrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64294:It sometimes happens, that on certain shores of Bretagne or Scotland a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64296:the beach far from shore, suddenly notices that for several minutes
tests/les_miserables.txt:64297:past, he has been walking with some difficulty. The beach under foot is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64298:like pitch; his soles stick fast to it; it is no longer sand, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64299:bird-lime. The strand is perfectly dry, but at every step that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:64301:The eye, however, has perceived no change; the immense beach is smooth
tests/les_miserables.txt:64302:and tranquil, all the sand has the same aspect, nothing distinguishes
tests/les_miserables.txt:64303:the soil that is solid from that which is not solid; the joyous little
tests/les_miserables.txt:64304:cloud of sand-lice continues to leap tumultuously under the feet of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64308:to approach the shore. He is not uneasy. Uneasy about what? Only he is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64309:conscious that the heaviness of his feet seems to be increasing at
tests/les_miserables.txt:64310:every step that he takes. All at once he sinks in. He sinks in two or
tests/les_miserables.txt:64311:three inches. Decidedly, he is not on the right road; he halts to get
tests/les_miserables.txt:64312:his bearings. Suddenly he glances at his feet; his feet have
tests/les_miserables.txt:64313:disappeared. The sand has covered them. He draws his feet out of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64314:sand, he tries to retrace his steps, he turns back, he sinks in more
tests/les_miserables.txt:64316:from it and flings himself to the left, the sand reaches to mid-leg, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:64317:flings himself to the right, the sand comes up to his knees. Then, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:64318:indescribable terror, he recognizes the fact that he is caught in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64319:quicksand, and that he has beneath him that frightful medium in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:64320:neither man can walk nor fish can swim. He flings away his burden, if
tests/les_miserables.txt:64324:He shouts, he waves his hat, or his handkerchief, the sand continually
tests/les_miserables.txt:64325:gains on him; if the beach is deserted, if the land is too far away, if
tests/les_miserables.txt:64327:neighborhood, all is over, he is condemned to be engulfed. He is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64328:condemned to that terrible interment, long, infallible, implacable,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64329:which it is impossible to either retard or hasten, which lasts for
tests/les_miserables.txt:64330:hours, which will not come to an end, which seizes you erect, free, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64331:the flush of health, which drags you down by the feet, which, at every
tests/les_miserables.txt:64333:little lower, which has the air of punishing you for your resistance by
tests/les_miserables.txt:64334:a redoubled grasp, which forces a man to return slowly to earth, while
tests/les_miserables.txt:64335:leaving him time to survey the horizon, the trees, the verdant country,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64337:sea, the birds which fly and sing, the sun and the sky. This engulfment
tests/les_miserables.txt:64338:is the sepulchre which assumes a tide, and which mounts from the depths
tests/les_miserables.txt:64339:of the earth towards a living man. Each minute is an inexorable
tests/les_miserables.txt:64340:layer-out of the dead. The wretched man tries to sit down, to lie down,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64341:to climb; every movement that he makes buries him deeper; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:64343:up; he shrieks, implores, cries to the clouds, wrings his hands, grows
tests/les_miserables.txt:64344:desperate. Behold him in the sand up to his belly, the sand reaches to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64346:groans, clenches his nails on the beach, tries to cling fast to that
tests/les_miserables.txt:64348:that soft sheath, and sobs frantically; the sand mounts higher. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:64349:sand has reached his shoulders, the sand reaches to his throat; only
tests/les_miserables.txt:64350:his face is visible now. His mouth cries aloud, the sand fills it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:64351:silence. His eyes still gaze forth, the sand closes them, night. Then
tests/les_miserables.txt:64352:his brow decreases, a little hair quivers above the sand; a hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:64353:projects, pierces the surface of the beach, waves and disappears.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64356:Sometimes a rider is engulfed with his horse; sometimes the carter is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64357:swallowed up with his cart; all founders in that strand. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64358:shipwreck elsewhere than in the water. It is the earth drowning a man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64359:The earth, permeated with the ocean, becomes a pitfall. It presents
tests/les_miserables.txt:64361:subject to these treacheries.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64363:This melancholy fate, always possible on certain sea beaches, was also
tests/les_miserables.txt:64367:of Paris was subject to these sudden slides.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64369:The water filtered into certain subjacent strata, which were
tests/les_miserables.txt:64370:particularly friable; the foot-way, which was of flag-stones, as in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64371:ancient sewers, or of cement on concrete, as in the new galleries,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64373:this sort means a crack, means crumbling. The framework crumbled away
tests/les_miserables.txt:64374:for a certain length. This crevice, the hiatus of a gulf of mire, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64375:called a _fontis_, in the special tongue. What is a _fontis?_ It is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64376:quicksands of the seashore suddenly encountered under the surface of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64377:the earth; it is the beach of Mont Saint-Michel in a sewer. The soaked
tests/les_miserables.txt:64378:soil is in a state of fusion, as it were; all its molecules are in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64380:depth is sometimes very great. Nothing can be more formidable than such
tests/les_miserables.txt:64381:an encounter. If the water predominates, death is prompt, the man is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64384:Can any one picture to himself such a death? If being swallowed by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64385:earth is terrible on the seashore, what is it in a cesspool? Instead of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64386:the open air, the broad daylight, the clear horizon, those vast sounds,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64387:those free clouds whence rains life, instead of those barks descried in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64388:the distance, of that hope under all sorts of forms, of probable
tests/les_miserables.txt:64389:passers-by, of succor possible up to the very last moment,—instead of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64390:all this, deafness, blindness, a black vault, the inside of a tomb
tests/les_miserables.txt:64391:already prepared, death in the mire beneath a cover! slow suffocation
tests/les_miserables.txt:64392:by filth, a stone box where asphyxia opens its claw in the mire and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64393:clutches you by the throat; fetidness mingled with the death-rattle;
tests/les_miserables.txt:64394:slime instead of the strand, sulfuretted hydrogen in place of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64395:hurricane, dung in place of the ocean! And to shout, to gnash one’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:64397:enormous city which knows nothing of it all, over one’s head!
tests/les_miserables.txt:64400:atrocity by a certain terrible dignity. On the funeral pile, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64401:shipwreck, one can be great; in the flames as in the foam, a superb
tests/les_miserables.txt:64402:attitude is possible; one there becomes transfigured as one perishes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64404:floating visions are abject. Mud is synonymous with shame. It is petty,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64405:ugly, infamous. To die in a butt of Malvoisie, like Clarence, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64406:permissible; in the ditch of a scavenger, like Escoubleau, is horrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64410:the dying man knows not whether he is on the point of becoming a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64411:spectre or a frog.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64413:Everywhere else the sepulchre is sinister; here it is deformed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64416:density, according to the more or less bad quality of the sub-soil.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64422:according to its density. A child can escape where a man will perish.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64425:away his sack of tools, or his back-basket, or his hod.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64427:The fontis were due to different causes: the friability of the soil;
tests/les_miserables.txt:64428:some landslip at a depth beyond the reach of man; the violent summer
tests/les_miserables.txt:64429:rains; the incessant flooding of winter; long, drizzling showers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64431:forced out the vaults of the subterranean galleries and caused them to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64432:bend aside, or it chanced that a flooring vault burst and split under
tests/les_miserables.txt:64433:this crushing thrust. In this manner, the heaping up of the Parthénon,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64434:obliterated, a century ago, a portion of the vaults of Saint-Geneviève
tests/les_miserables.txt:64436:mischief was sometimes betrayed in the street above by a sort of space,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64437:like the teeth of a saw, between the paving-stones; this crevice was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64439:cracked vault, and then, the evil being visible, the remedy could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:64441:ravages were not revealed by any external scar, and in that case, woe
tests/les_miserables.txt:64442:to the sewermen. When they entered without precaution into the sewer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64443:they were liable to be lost. Ancient registers make mention of several
tests/les_miserables.txt:64444:scavengers who were buried in fontis in this manner. They give many
tests/les_miserables.txt:64446:quagmire under the man-hole of the Rue Carême-Prenant, a certain Blaise
tests/les_miserables.txt:64447:Poutrain; this Blaise Poutrain was the brother of Nicholas Poutrain,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64448:who was the last grave-digger of the cemetery called the Charnier des
tests/les_miserables.txt:64449:Innocents, in 1785, the epoch when that cemetery expired.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64451:There was also that young and charming Vicomte d’Escoubleau, of whom we
tests/les_miserables.txt:64453:delivered the assault in silk stockings, with violins at their head.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64454:D’Escoubleau, surprised one night at his cousin’s, the Duchesse de
tests/les_miserables.txt:64455:Sourdis’, was drowned in a quagmire of the Beautreillis sewer, in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:64456:he had taken refuge in order to escape from the Duke. Madame de
tests/les_miserables.txt:64458:forgot to weep, through sniffling at her salts. In such cases, there is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64459:no love which holds fast; the sewer extinguishes it. Hero refuses to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64460:wash the body of Leander. Thisbe stops her nose in the presence of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64470:Jean Valjean found himself in the presence of a fontis.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64472:This sort of quagmire was common at that period in the subsoil of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64473:Champs-Élysées, difficult to handle in the hydraulic works and a bad
tests/les_miserables.txt:64474:preservative of the subterranean constructions, on account of its
tests/les_miserables.txt:64475:excessive fluidity. This fluidity exceeds even the inconsistency of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64476:sands of the Quartier Saint-Georges, which could only be conquered by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64477:stone construction on a concrete foundation, and the clayey strata,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64478:infected with gas, of the Quartier des Martyrs, which are so liquid
tests/les_miserables.txt:64479:that the only way in which a passage was effected under the gallery des
tests/les_miserables.txt:64480:Martyrs was by means of a cast-iron pipe. When, in 1836, the old stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:64481:sewer beneath the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, in which we now see Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:64482:Valjean, was demolished for the purpose of reconstructing it, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64483:quicksand, which forms the subsoil of the Champs-Élysées as far as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64484:Seine, presented such an obstacle, that the operation lasted nearly six
tests/les_miserables.txt:64485:months, to the great clamor of the dwellers on the riverside,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64486:particularly those who had hotels and carriages. The work was more than
tests/les_miserables.txt:64490:The fontis which Jean Valjean had encountered was caused by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64491:downpour of the preceding day. The pavement, badly sustained by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64492:subjacent sand, had given way and had produced a stoppage of the water.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64493:Infiltration had taken place, a slip had followed. The dislocated
tests/les_miserables.txt:64495:obscurity was more dense there than elsewhere. It was a pit of mire in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64496:a cavern of night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64499:this slime. There was water on the surface, slime at the bottom. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:64500:must pass it. To retrace his steps was impossible. Marius was dying,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64502:advanced. Moreover, the pit seemed, for the first few steps, not to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:64503:very deep. But in proportion as he advanced, his feet plunged deeper.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64504:Soon he had the slime up to his calves and water above his knees. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:64506:could. The mire now reached to his knees, and the water to his waist.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64507:He could no longer retreat. This mud, dense enough for one man, could
tests/les_miserables.txt:64509:chance of extricating themselves singly. Jean Valjean continued to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64510:advance, supporting the dying man, who was, perhaps, a corpse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64512:The water came up to his arm-pits; he felt that he was sinking; it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64513:only with difficulty that he could move in the depth of ooze which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:64514:had now reached. The density, which was his support, was also an
tests/les_miserables.txt:64515:obstacle. He still held Marius on high, and with an unheard-of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64516:expenditure of force, he advanced still; but he was sinking. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:64518:In the old paintings of the deluge there is a mother holding her child
tests/les_miserables.txt:64521:He sank still deeper, he turned his face to the rear, to escape the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64524:mask floating on the shadows; he caught a faint glimpse above him of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64525:the drooping head and livid face of Marius; he made a desperate effort
tests/les_miserables.txt:64526:and launched his foot forward; his foot struck something solid; a point
tests/les_miserables.txt:64530:support with a sort of fury. This produced upon him the effect of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64531:first step in a staircase leading back to life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64533:The point of support, thus encountered in the mire at the supreme
tests/les_miserables.txt:64534:moment, was the beginning of the other watershed of the pavement, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:64535:had bent but had not given way, and which had curved under the water
tests/les_miserables.txt:64536:like a plank and in a single piece. Well built pavements form a vault
tests/les_miserables.txt:64538:partly submerged, but solid, was a veritable inclined plane, and, once
tests/les_miserables.txt:64539:on this plane, he was safe. Jean Valjean mounted this inclined plane
tests/les_miserables.txt:64540:and reached the other side of the quagmire.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64542:As he emerged from the water, he came in contact with a stone and fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:64543:upon his knees. He reflected that this was but just, and he remained
tests/les_miserables.txt:64546:He rose to his feet, shivering, chilled, foul-smelling, bowed beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:64557:He set out on his way once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64561:exhausted him. His lassitude was now such that he was obliged to pause
tests/les_miserables.txt:64562:for breath every three or four steps, and lean against the wall. Once
tests/les_miserables.txt:64563:he was forced to seat himself on the banquette in order to alter
tests/les_miserables.txt:64567:He walked on desperately, almost fast, proceeded thus for a hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:64568:paces, almost without drawing breath, and suddenly came in contact with
tests/les_miserables.txt:64569:the wall. He had reached an elbow of the sewer, and, arriving at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64570:turn with head bent down, he had struck the wall. He raised his eyes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64572:he perceived a light. This time it was not that terrible light; it was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64575:A damned soul, who, in the midst of the furnace, should suddenly
tests/les_miserables.txt:64576:perceive the outlet of Gehenna, would experience what Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:64578:that radiant portal. Jean Valjean was no longer conscious of fatigue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64579:he no longer felt Marius’ weight, he found his legs once more of steel,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64580:he ran rather than walked. As he approached, the outlet became more and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64581:more distinctly defined. It was a pointed arch, lower than the vault,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64582:which gradually narrowed, and narrower than the gallery, which closed
tests/les_miserables.txt:64584:funnel; a faulty construction, imitated from the wickets of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64585:penitentiaries, logical in a prison, illogical in a sewer, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:64586:has since been corrected.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64588:Jean Valjean reached the outlet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64592:It certainly was the outlet, but he could not get out.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64594:The arch was closed by a heavy grating, and the grating, which, to all
tests/les_miserables.txt:64595:appearance, rarely swung on its rusty hinges, was clamped to its stone
tests/les_miserables.txt:64596:jamb by a thick lock, which, red with rust, seemed like an enormous
tests/les_miserables.txt:64597:brick. The keyhole could be seen, and the robust latch, deeply sunk in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64598:the iron staple. The door was plainly double-locked. It was one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64599:those prison locks which old Paris was so fond of lavishing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64602:shore, very narrow but sufficient for escape. The distant quays, Paris,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64603:that gulf in which one so easily hides oneself, the broad horizon,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64604:liberty. On the right, downstream, the bridge of Jéna was discernible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64605:on the left, upstream, the bridge of the Invalides; the place would
tests/les_miserables.txt:64606:have been a propitious one in which to await the night and to escape.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64607:It was one of the most solitary points in Paris; the shore which faces
tests/les_miserables.txt:64611:It might have been half-past eight o’clock in the evening. The day was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64612:declining.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64615:vaulting, then he went to the grating and clenched both fists round the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64616:bars; the shock which he gave it was frenzied, but it did not move. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:64619:make of it a lever wherewith to raise the door or to break the lock.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64621:their sockets. No lever; no prying possible. The obstacle was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64622:invincible. There was no means of opening the gate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64624:Must he then stop there? What was he to do? What was to become of him?
tests/les_miserables.txt:64625:He had not the strength to retrace his steps, to recommence the journey
tests/les_miserables.txt:64626:which he had already taken. Besides, how was he to again traverse that
tests/les_miserables.txt:64627:quagmire whence he had only extricated himself as by a miracle? And
tests/les_miserables.txt:64628:after the quagmire, was there not the police patrol, which assuredly
tests/les_miserables.txt:64629:could not be twice avoided? And then, whither was he to go? What
tests/les_miserables.txt:64630:direction should he pursue? To follow the incline would not conduct him
tests/les_miserables.txt:64631:to his goal. If he were to reach another outlet, he would find it
tests/les_miserables.txt:64632:obstructed by a plug or a grating. Every outlet was, undoubtedly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64633:closed in that manner. Chance had unsealed the grating through which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:64635:barred. He had only succeeded in escaping into a prison.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64640:They were both caught in the immense and gloomy web of death, and Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:64641:Valjean felt the terrible spider running along those black strands and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64642:quivering in the shadows. He turned his back to the grating, and fell
tests/les_miserables.txt:64643:upon the pavement, hurled to earth rather than seated, close to Marius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64657:a low voice said to him:
tests/les_miserables.txt:64662:Some person in that gloom? Nothing so closely resembles a dream as
tests/les_miserables.txt:64668:This man was clad in a blouse; his feet were bare; he held his shoes in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64669:his left hand; he had evidently removed them in order to reach Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:64672:Jean Valjean did not hesitate for an instant. Unexpected as was this
tests/les_miserables.txt:64673:encounter, this man was known to him. The man was Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64675:Although awakened, so to speak, with a start, Jean Valjean, accustomed
tests/les_miserables.txt:64676:to alarms, and steeled to unforeseen shocks that must be promptly
tests/les_miserables.txt:64677:parried, instantly regained possession of his presence of mind.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64678:Moreover, the situation could not be made worse, a certain degree of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64679:distress is no longer capable of a crescendo, and Thénardier himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:64680:could add nothing to this blackness of this night.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64685:with it a shade, then he brought his eyelashes together, by screwing up
tests/les_miserables.txt:64686:his eyes, a motion which, in connection with a slight contraction of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64687:the mouth, characterizes the sagacious attention of a man who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64688:endeavoring to recognize another man. He did not succeed. Jean Valjean,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64689:as we have just stated, had his back turned to the light, and he was,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64691:been unrecognizable in full noonday. On the contrary, illuminated by
tests/les_miserables.txt:64692:the light from the grating, a cellar light, it is true, livid, yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:64693:precise in its lividness, Thénardier, as the energetic popular metaphor
tests/les_miserables.txt:64695:inequality of conditions sufficed to assure some advantage to Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:64696:Valjean in that mysterious duel which was on the point of beginning
tests/les_miserables.txt:64697:between the two situations and the two men. The encounter took place
tests/les_miserables.txt:64700:Jean Valjean immediately perceived that Thénardier did not recognize
tests/les_miserables.txt:64703:They surveyed each other for a moment in that half-gloom, as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:64704:taking each other’s measure. Thénardier was the first to break the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64705:silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64710:Jean Valjean made no reply. Thénardier continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:64712:“It’s impossible to pick the lock of that gate. But still you must get
tests/les_miserables.txt:64732:Jean Valjean began to comprehend. Thénardier took him for an assassin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64736:“Listen, comrade. You didn’t kill that man without looking to see what
tests/les_miserables.txt:64737:he had in his pockets. Give me my half. I’ll open the door for you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:64746:Corneille—to such a degree that he doubted whether what he beheld was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64747:real. It was Providence appearing in horrible guise, and his good angel
tests/les_miserables.txt:64750:Thénardier thrust his fist into a large pocket concealed under his
tests/les_miserables.txt:64759:“You will need a stone also, but you can find one outside. There’s a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64770:Jean Valjean took the rope. There is no one who does not occasionally
tests/les_miserables.txt:64771:accept in this mechanical way.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64773:Thénardier snapped his fingers as though an idea had suddenly occurred
tests/les_miserables.txt:64776:“Ah, see here, comrade, how did you contrive to get out of that slough
tests/les_miserables.txt:64783:“I’m asking you questions, but you’re perfectly right not to answer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64784:It’s an apprenticeship against that cursed quarter of an hour before
tests/les_miserables.txt:64786:no risk of talking too loud. That’s no matter, as I can’t see your face
tests/les_miserables.txt:64789:gentleman a bit; now you want to tuck him away somewhere. The river,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64791:scrape. Helping a good fellow in a pinch is what suits me to a hair.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:64794:While expressing his approval of Jean Valjean’s silence, he endeavored
tests/les_miserables.txt:64795:to force him to talk. He jostled his shoulder in an attempt to catch a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64796:sight of his profile, and he exclaimed, without, however, raising his
tests/les_miserables.txt:64803:Jean Valjean preserved silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64805:Thénardier resumed, pushing the rag which served him as a cravat to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64806:level of his Adam’s apple, a gesture which completes the capable air of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64809:“After all, you acted wisely. The workmen, when they come to-morrow to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64810:stop up that hole, would certainly have found the stiff abandoned
tests/les_miserables.txt:64812:straw, to pick up the scent and reach you. Some one has passed through
tests/les_miserables.txt:64813:the sewer. Who? Where did he get out? Was he seen to come out? The
tests/les_miserables.txt:64814:police are full of cleverness. The sewer is treacherous and tells tales
tests/les_miserables.txt:64815:of you. Such a find is a rarity, it attracts attention, very few people
tests/les_miserables.txt:64818:up your man in the nets at Saint-Cloud. Well, what does one care for
tests/les_miserables.txt:64819:that? It’s carrion! Who killed that man? Paris. And justice makes no
tests/les_miserables.txt:64823:The more loquacious Thénardier became, the more mute was Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64831:Thénardier was haggard, fierce, suspicious, rather menacing, yet
tests/les_miserables.txt:64832:amicable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64834:There was one singular circumstance; Thénardier’s manners were not
tests/les_miserables.txt:64835:simple; he had not the air of being wholly at his ease; while affecting
tests/les_miserables.txt:64837:on his mouth, and muttered, “hush!” It was difficult to divine why.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64838:There was no one there except themselves. Jean Valjean thought that
tests/les_miserables.txt:64839:other ruffians might possibly be concealed in some nook, not very far
tests/les_miserables.txt:64840:off, and that Thénardier did not care to share with them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64844:“Let’s settle up. How much did the stiff have in his bags?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:64847:Jean Valjean searched his pockets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64850:money about him. The mournful life of expedients to which he had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:64851:condemned imposed this as a law upon him. On this occasion, however, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:64852:had been caught unprepared. When donning his uniform of a National
tests/les_miserables.txt:64853:Guardsman on the preceding evening, he had forgotten, dolefully
tests/les_miserables.txt:64854:absorbed as he was, to take his pocket-book. He had only some small
tests/les_miserables.txt:64855:change in his fob. He turned out his pocket, all soaked with ooze, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64856:spread out on the banquette of the vault one louis d’or, two five-franc
tests/les_miserables.txt:64857:pieces, and five or six large sous.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64859:Thénardier thrust out his lower lip with a significant twist of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64860:neck.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64862:“You knocked him over cheap,” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64864:He set to feeling the pockets of Jean Valjean and Marius, with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64865:greatest familiarity. Jean Valjean, who was chiefly concerned in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64866:keeping his back to the light, let him have his way.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64868:While handling Marius’ coat, Thénardier, with the skill of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64869:pickpocket, and without being noticed by Jean Valjean, tore off a strip
tests/les_miserables.txt:64870:which he concealed under his blouse, probably thinking that this morsel
tests/les_miserables.txt:64872:the assassin. However, he found no more than the thirty francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64879:He hesitated a little over the large sous. After due reflection, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:64882:“Never mind! You cut folks’ throats too cheap altogether.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:64885:That done, he once more drew the big key from under his blouse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64888:you go out. You have paid, now clear out.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:64895:disinterested intention of rescuing an assassin? We may be permitted to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64898:Thénardier helped Jean Valjean to replace Marius on his shoulders, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:64901:and remained for several seconds, as though in suspense; his inspection
tests/les_miserables.txt:64902:finished, he placed the key in the lock. The bolt slipped back and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64905:It was obvious that this gate and those hinges, carefully oiled, were
tests/les_miserables.txt:64907:softness was suspicious; it hinted at furtive goings and comings,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64908:silent entrances and exits of nocturnal men, and the wolf-like tread of
tests/les_miserables.txt:64909:crime.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64911:The sewer was evidently an accomplice of some mysterious band. This
tests/les_miserables.txt:64912:taciturn grating was a receiver of stolen goods.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64914:Thénardier opened the gate a little way, allowing just sufficient space
tests/les_miserables.txt:64915:for Jean Valjean to pass out, closed the grating again, gave the key a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64916:double turn in the lock and plunged back into the darkness, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:64920:A moment later, that hideous providence had retreated into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64938:around him reigned silence, but that charming silence when the sun has
tests/les_miserables.txt:64939:set in an unclouded azure sky. Twilight had descended; night was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64941:mantle of darkness that they may escape from an anguish. The sky
tests/les_miserables.txt:64942:presented itself in all directions like an enormous calm. The river
tests/les_miserables.txt:64944:nests bidding each other good night in the elms of the Champs-Élysées
tests/les_miserables.txt:64945:was audible. A few stars, daintily piercing the pale blue of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64946:zenith, and visible to reverie alone, formed imperceptible little
tests/les_miserables.txt:64950:It was that exquisite and undecided hour which says neither yes nor no.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64951:Night was already sufficiently advanced to render it possible to lose
tests/les_miserables.txt:64952:oneself at a little distance and yet there was sufficient daylight to
tests/les_miserables.txt:64953:permit of recognition at close quarters.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64955:For several seconds, Jean Valjean was irresistibly overcome by that
tests/les_miserables.txt:64956:august and caressing serenity; such moments of oblivion do come to men;
tests/les_miserables.txt:64957:suffering refrains from harassing the unhappy wretch; everything is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64958:eclipsed in the thoughts; peace broods over the dreamer like night;
tests/les_miserables.txt:64959:and, beneath the twilight which beams and in imitation of the sky which
tests/les_miserables.txt:64960:is illuminated, the soul becomes studded with stars. Jean Valjean could
tests/les_miserables.txt:64961:not refrain from contemplating that vast, clear shadow which rested
tests/les_miserables.txt:64962:over him; thoughtfully he bathed in the sea of ecstasy and prayer in
tests/les_miserables.txt:64963:the majestic silence of the eternal heavens. Then he bent down swiftly
tests/les_miserables.txt:64966:drops on the latter’s face. Marius’ eyelids did not open; but his
tests/les_miserables.txt:64969:Jean Valjean was on the point of dipping his hand in the river once
tests/les_miserables.txt:64970:more, when, all at once, he experienced an indescribable embarrassment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64971:such as a person feels when there is some one behind him whom he does
tests/les_miserables.txt:64974:We have already alluded to this impression, with which everyone is
tests/les_miserables.txt:64979:Some one was, in fact, behind him, as there had been a short while
tests/les_miserables.txt:64982:A man of lofty stature, enveloped in a long coat, with folded arms, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:64983:bearing in his right fist a bludgeon of which the leaden head was
tests/les_miserables.txt:64984:visible, stood a few paces in the rear of the spot where Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:64985:was crouching over Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:64988:ordinary man would have been alarmed because of the twilight, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64989:thoughtful man on account of the bludgeon. Jean Valjean recognized
tests/les_miserables.txt:64993:other than Javert. Javert, after his unlooked-for escape from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64994:barricade, had betaken himself to the prefecture of police, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:64995:rendered a verbal account to the Prefect in person in a brief audience,
tests/les_miserables.txt:64996:had then immediately gone on duty again, which implied—the note, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64997:reader will recollect, which had been captured on his person—a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:64998:surveillance of the shore on the right bank of the Seine near the
tests/les_miserables.txt:64999:Champs-Élysées, which had, for some time past, aroused the attention of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65000:the police. There he had caught sight of Thénardier and had followed
tests/les_miserables.txt:65004:opened to Jean Valjean, was a bit of cleverness on Thénardier’s part.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65006:upon has a scent which never deceives him; it was necessary to fling a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65007:bone to that sleuth-hound. An assassin, what a godsend! Such an
tests/les_miserables.txt:65009:Valjean outside in his stead, provided a prey for the police, forced
tests/les_miserables.txt:65010:them to relinquish his scent, made them forget him in a bigger
tests/les_miserables.txt:65011:adventure, repaid Javert for his waiting, which always flatters a spy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65012:earned thirty francs, and counted with certainty, so far as he himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:65013:was concerned, on escaping with the aid of this diversion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65017:These two encounters, this falling one after the other, from Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:65018:upon Javert, was a rude shock.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65020:Javert did not recognize Jean Valjean, who, as we have stated, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:65022:his bludgeon in his fist, by an imperceptible movement, and said in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65023:curt, calm voice:
tests/les_miserables.txt:65037:Javert thrust his bludgeon between his teeth, bent his knees, inclined
tests/les_miserables.txt:65039:which were clamped within them as in a couple of vices, scrutinized
tests/les_miserables.txt:65040:him, and recognized him. Their faces almost touched. Javert’s look was
tests/les_miserables.txt:65044:submitting to the claws of a lynx.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65046:“Inspector Javert,” said he, “you have me in your power. Moreover, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:65047:have regarded myself as your prisoner ever since this morning. I did
tests/les_miserables.txt:65048:not give you my address with any intention of escaping from you. Take
tests/les_miserables.txt:65053:Valjean. His chin being contracted, thrust his lips upwards towards his
tests/les_miserables.txt:65064:Jean Valjean replied, and the sound of his voice appeared to rouse
tests/les_miserables.txt:65068:as you see fit; but first help me to carry him home. That is all that I
tests/les_miserables.txt:65072:Javert’s face contracted as was always the case when any one seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65073:think him capable of making a concession. Nevertheless, he did not say
tests/les_miserables.txt:65077:Again he bent over, drew from his pocket a handkerchief which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:65078:moistened in the water and with which he then wiped Marius’
tests/les_miserables.txt:65081:“This man was at the barricade,” said he in a low voice and as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:65082:speaking to himself. “He is the one they called Marius.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65088:elbows leaning on the first step of the sepulchre, had taken notes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65101:“So you have brought him thither from the barricade?” remarked Javert.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65103:His preoccupation must indeed have been very profound for him not to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65104:insist on this alarming rescue through the sewer, and for him not to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65105:even notice Jean Valjean’s silence after his question.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65110:grandfather. I do not recollect his name.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65113:Jean Valjean fumbled in Marius’ coat, pulled out his pocket-book,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65114:opened it at the page which Marius had pencilled, and held it out to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65117:There was still sufficient light to admit of reading. Besides this,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65118:Javert possessed in his eye the feline phosphorescence of night birds.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65119:He deciphered the few lines written by Marius, and muttered:
tests/les_miserables.txt:65123:Then he exclaimed: “Coachman!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65126:The reader will remember that the hackney-coach was waiting in case of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65129:Javert kept Marius’ pocket-book.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65131:A moment later, the carriage, which had descended by the inclined plane
tests/les_miserables.txt:65132:of the watering-place, was on the shore. Marius was laid upon the back
tests/les_miserables.txt:65135:The door slammed, and the carriage drove rapidly away, ascending the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65136:quays in the direction of the Bastille.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65138:They quitted the quays and entered the streets. The coachman, a black
tests/les_miserables.txt:65139:form on his box, whipped up his thin horses. A glacial silence reigned
tests/les_miserables.txt:65140:in the carriage. Marius, motionless, with his body resting in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65141:corner, and his head drooping on his breast, his arms hanging, his legs
tests/les_miserables.txt:65142:stiff, seemed to be awaiting only a coffin; Jean Valjean seemed made of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65143:shadow, and Javert of stone, and in that vehicle full of night, whose
tests/les_miserables.txt:65146:lightning, chance had united and seemed to be bringing face to face the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65147:three forms of tragic immobility, the corpse, the spectre, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65156:At every jolt over the pavement, a drop of blood trickled from Marius’
tests/les_miserables.txt:65159:Night had fully closed in when the carriage arrived at No. 6, Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:65162:Javert was the first to alight; he made sure with one glance of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65163:number on the carriage gate, and, raising the heavy knocker of beaten
tests/les_miserables.txt:65165:confronting each other, he gave a violent peal. The gate opened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65167:appearance yawning, vaguely awake, and with a candle in his hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65170:Marais, especially on days when there is a revolt. This good, old
tests/les_miserables.txt:65172:children, when they hear the Bugaboo coming, hide their heads hastily
tests/les_miserables.txt:65173:under their coverlet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65175:In the meantime Jean Valjean and the coachman had taken Marius out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65176:the carriage, Jean Valjean supporting him under the armpits, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65177:coachman under the knees.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65180:latter’s clothes, which were broadly rent, felt his breast, and assured
tests/les_miserables.txt:65182:less feebly, as though the movement of the carriage had brought about a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65183:certain fresh access of life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65186:presence of the porter of a factious person.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65194:“His son is brought back.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65209:Javert continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:65211:“He went to the barricade, and here he is.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65214:“To the barricade?” ejaculated the porter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65228:For Javert, the usual incidents of the public highway were
tests/les_miserables.txt:65229:categorically classed, which is the beginning of foresight and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65230:surveillance, and each contingency had its own compartment; all
tests/les_miserables.txt:65231:possible facts were arranged in drawers, as it were, whence they
tests/les_miserables.txt:65232:emerged on occasion, in variable quantities; in the street, uproar,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65233:revolt, carnival, and funeral.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65235:The porter contented himself with waking Basque. Basque woke Nicolette;
tests/les_miserables.txt:65236:Nicolette roused great-aunt Gillenormand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65239:hear about the matter early enough in any case.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65241:Marius was carried up to the first floor, without any one in the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:65242:parts of the house being aware of the fact, and deposited on an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:65243:sofa in M. Gillenormand’s antechamber; and while Basque went in search
tests/les_miserables.txt:65244:of a physician, and while Nicolette opened the linen-presses, Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:65245:Valjean felt Javert touch him on the shoulder. He understood and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65246:descended the stairs, having behind him the step of Javert who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:65249:The porter watched them take their departure as he had watched their
tests/les_miserables.txt:65250:arrival, in terrified somnolence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65252:They entered the carriage once more, and the coachman mounted his box.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65254:“Inspector Javert,” said Jean, “grant me yet another favor.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65263:Javert remained silent for a few moments, with his chin drawn back into
tests/les_miserables.txt:65264:the collar of his great-coat, then he lowered the glass and front:
tests/les_miserables.txt:65275:They did not open their lips again during the whole space of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:65280:other useful information, to take, if he could, certain final measures.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65281:As for himself, so far as he was personally concerned, all was over; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:65284:connected with the rope which Thénardier had given him, and of the bars
tests/les_miserables.txt:65285:of the first cell that he should enter; but, let us impress it upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65287:hesitation in the presence of any violence, even when directed against
tests/les_miserables.txt:65290:Suicide, that mysterious act of violence against the unknown which may
tests/les_miserables.txt:65291:contain, in a measure, the death of the soul, was impossible to Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:65294:At the entrance to the Rue de l’Homme Armé, the carriage halted, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65295:way being too narrow to admit of the entrance of vehicles. Javert and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65298:The coachman humbly represented to “monsieur l’Inspecteur,” that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65299:Utrecht velvet of his carriage was all spotted with the blood of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65302:time, drawing his certificate book from his pocket, he begged the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65303:inspector to have the goodness to write him “a bit of an attestation.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65306:Javert thrust aside the book which the coachman held out to him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65309:“How much do you want, including your time of waiting and the drive?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65312:“It comes to seven hours and a quarter,” replied the man, “and my
tests/les_miserables.txt:65313:velvet was perfectly new. Eighty francs, Mr. Inspector.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65316:Javert drew four napoleons from his pocket and dismissed the carriage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65318:Jean Valjean fancied that it was Javert’s intention to conduct him on
tests/les_miserables.txt:65319:foot to the post of the Blancs-Manteaux or to the post of the Archives,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65320:both of which are close at hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65323:Valjean. They reached No. 7. Jean Valjean knocked. The door opened.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65334:Jean Valjean looked at Javert. This mode of procedure was but little in
tests/les_miserables.txt:65335:accord with Javert’s habits. However, he could not be greatly surprised
tests/les_miserables.txt:65336:that Javert should now have a sort of haughty confidence in him, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65337:confidence of the cat which grants the mouse liberty to the length of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65338:its claws, seeing that Jean Valjean had made up his mind to surrender
tests/les_miserables.txt:65340:house, called to the porter who was in bed and who had pulled the cord
tests/les_miserables.txt:65341:from his couch: “It is I!” and ascended the stairs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65344:their stations. The window on the landing-place, which was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65345:sash-window, was open. As in many ancient houses, the staircase got its
tests/les_miserables.txt:65347:situated directly opposite, cast some light on the stairs, and thus
tests/les_miserables.txt:65348:effected some economy in illumination.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65350:Jean Valjean, either for the sake of getting the air, or mechanically,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65363:Basque and the porter had carried Marius into the drawing-room, as he
tests/les_miserables.txt:65364:still lay stretched out, motionless, on the sofa upon which he had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:65365:placed on his arrival. The doctor who had been sent for had hastened
tests/les_miserables.txt:65368:Aunt Gillenormand went and came, in affright, wringing her hands and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65369:incapable of doing anything but saying: “Heavens! is it possible?” At
tests/les_miserables.txt:65370:times she added: “Everything will be covered with blood.” When her
tests/les_miserables.txt:65371:first horror had passed off, a certain philosophy of the situation
tests/les_miserables.txt:65372:penetrated her mind, and took form in the exclamation: “It was bound to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65373:end in this way!” She did not go so far as: “I told you so!” which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:65374:customary on this sort of occasion. At the physician’s orders, a camp
tests/les_miserables.txt:65375:bed had been prepared beside the sofa. The doctor examined Marius, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65378:corners of his lips proceeded from his nostrils, he had him placed flat
tests/les_miserables.txt:65381:facilitate respiration. Mademoiselle Gillenormand, on perceiving that
tests/les_miserables.txt:65383:beads in her own chamber.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65386:the pocket-book, had turned aside and made the tour of his ribs with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65387:hideous laceration, which was of no great depth, and consequently, not
tests/les_miserables.txt:65388:dangerous. The long, underground journey had completed the dislocation
tests/les_miserables.txt:65389:of the broken collar-bone, and the disorder there was serious. The arms
tests/les_miserables.txt:65390:had been slashed with sabre cuts. Not a single scar disfigured his
tests/les_miserables.txt:65391:face; but his head was fairly covered with cuts; what would be the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65393:cuticle, or would they attack the brain? As yet, this could not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:65394:decided. A grave symptom was that they had caused a swoon, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:65395:people do not always recover from such swoons. Moreover, the wounded
tests/les_miserables.txt:65397:barricade had protected the lower part of the body from injury.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65399:Basque and Nicolette tore up linen and prepared bandages; Nicolette
tests/les_miserables.txt:65400:sewed them, Basque rolled them. As lint was lacking, the doctor, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:65402:the bed, three candles burned on a table where the case of surgical
tests/les_miserables.txt:65403:instruments lay spread out. The doctor bathed Marius’ face and hair
tests/les_miserables.txt:65404:with cold water. A full pail was reddened in an instant. The porter,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65405:candle in hand, lighted them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65407:The doctor seemed to be pondering sadly. From time to time, he made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65408:negative sign with his head, as though replying to some question which
tests/les_miserables.txt:65411:A bad sign for the sick man are these mysterious dialogues of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65412:doctor with himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65414:At the moment when the doctor was wiping Marius’ face, and lightly
tests/les_miserables.txt:65415:touching his still closed eyes with his finger, a door opened at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65416:end of the drawing-room, and a long, pallid figure made its appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65423:evening, he had gone to bed very early, recommending that everything in
tests/les_miserables.txt:65427:Old men sleep lightly; M. Gillenormand’s chamber adjoined the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65428:drawing-room, and in spite of all the precautions that had been taken,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65429:the noise had awakened him. Surprised at the rift of light which he saw
tests/les_miserables.txt:65435:body wrapped in a white dressing-gown, which was straight and as
tests/les_miserables.txt:65440:with a waxen whiteness, with closed eyes and gaping mouth, and pallid
tests/les_miserables.txt:65441:lips, stripped to the waist, slashed all over with crimson wounds,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65445:limbs can tremble, his eyes, whose corneæ were yellow on account of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:65446:great age, were veiled in a sort of vitreous glitter, his whole face
tests/les_miserables.txt:65449:by the outspreading of the fingers of his two aged hands, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:65457:“Sir,” said Basque, “Monsieur has just been brought back. He went to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65458:the barricade, and....”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65461:“He is dead!” cried the old man in a terrible voice. “Ah! The rascal!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65464:Then a sort of sepulchral transformation straightened up this
tests/les_miserables.txt:65465:centenarian as erect as a young man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65467:“Sir,” said he, “you are the doctor. Begin by telling me one thing. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:65471:The doctor, who was at the highest pitch of anxiety, remained silent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65476:barricades! Out of hatred to me! He did that to spite me! Ah! You
tests/les_miserables.txt:65482:and, erect before the darkness, he began to talk into the street, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65485:“Pierced, sabred, exterminated, slashed, hacked in pieces! Just look at
tests/les_miserables.txt:65487:had had his room arranged, and that I had placed at the head of my bed
tests/les_miserables.txt:65488:his portrait taken when he was a little child! He knew well that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:65489:only to come back, and that I had been recalling him for years, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65493:the house, and that I should have obeyed you, and that you could have
tests/les_miserables.txt:65497:“No, he is a Royalist, I will not go! And you went to the barricades,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65498:and you got yourself killed out of malice! To revenge yourself for what
tests/les_miserables.txt:65499:I said to you about Monsieur le Duc de Berry. It is infamous! Go to bed
tests/les_miserables.txt:65503:The doctor, who was beginning to be uneasy in both quarters, quitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:65505:grandfather turned round, gazed at him with eyes which seemed
tests/les_miserables.txt:65506:exaggerated in size and bloodshot, and said to him calmly:
tests/les_miserables.txt:65508:“I thank you, sir. I am composed, I am a man, I witnessed the death of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65510:is to think that it is your newspapers which do all the mischief. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:65511:will have scribblers, chatterers, lawyers, orators, tribunes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65512:discussions, progress, enlightenment, the rights of man, the liberty of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65513:the press, and this is the way that your children will be brought home
tests/les_miserables.txt:65515:barricade! Ah, the scamp! Doctor, you live in this quarter, I believe?
tests/les_miserables.txt:65516:Oh! I know you well. I see your cabriolet pass my window. I am going to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65518:a rage against a dead man. That would be stupid. This is a child whom I
tests/les_miserables.txt:65520:the Tuileries garden with his little shovel and his little chair, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65521:in order that the inspectors might not grumble, I stopped up the holes
tests/les_miserables.txt:65522:that he made in the earth with his shovel, with my cane. One day he
tests/les_miserables.txt:65523:exclaimed: Down with Louis XVIII.! and off he went. It was no fault of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65525:noticed that all little children are blond? Why is it so? He is the son
tests/les_miserables.txt:65526:of one of those brigands of the Loire, but children are innocent of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65527:their fathers’ crimes. I remember when he was no higher than that. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:65528:could not manage to pronounce his Ds. He had a way of talking that was
tests/les_miserables.txt:65529:so sweet and indistinct that you would have thought it was a bird
tests/les_miserables.txt:65530:chirping. I remember that once, in front of the Hercules Farnese,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65531:people formed a circle to admire him and marvel at him, he was so
tests/les_miserables.txt:65532:handsome, was that child! He had a head such as you see in pictures. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:65533:talked in a deep voice, and I frightened him with my cane, but he knew
tests/les_miserables.txt:65536:the same. One cannot defend oneself against those brats. They take hold
tests/les_miserables.txt:65538:that there never was a cupid like that child. Now, what can you say for
tests/les_miserables.txt:65539:your Lafayettes, your Benjamin Constants, and your Tirecuir de
tests/les_miserables.txt:65540:Corcelles who have killed him? This cannot be allowed to pass in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:65544:He approached Marius, who still lay livid and motionless, and to whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:65545:the physician had returned, and began once more to wring his hands. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:65546:old man’s pallid lips moved as though mechanically, and permitted the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65550:“Ah! heartless lad! Ah! clubbist! Ah! wretch! Ah! Septembrist!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65553:Reproaches in the low voice of an agonizing man, addressed to a corpse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65556:should come to the light, the sequence of words returned, but the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65558:voice was so weak, and extinct, that it seemed to come from the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:65563:delighted to make this wretch happy! A scamp who, instead of amusing
tests/les_miserables.txt:65565:like a brute! And for whom? Why? For the Republic! Instead of going to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65566:dance at the Chaumière, as it is the duty of young folks to do! What’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:65567:the use of being twenty years old? The Republic, a cursed pretty folly!
tests/les_miserables.txt:65569:funerals under the same carriage gate. So you have got yourself
tests/les_miserables.txt:65571:What had that General Lamarque done to you? A slasher! A chatter-box!
tests/les_miserables.txt:65573:one mad! Just think of it! At twenty! And without so much as turning
tests/les_miserables.txt:65575:the way poor, good old fellows are forced to die alone, nowadays.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65576:Perish in your corner, owl! Well, after all, so much the better, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:65581:ammonia and all that parcel of drugs? You are wasting your trouble, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:65582:fool of a doctor! Come, he’s dead, completely dead. I know all about
tests/les_miserables.txt:65585:your systems, of your masters, of your oracles, of your doctors, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65586:your scape-graces of writers, of your rascally philosophers, and of all
tests/les_miserables.txt:65587:the revolutions which, for the last sixty years, have been frightening
tests/les_miserables.txt:65588:the flocks of crows in the Tuileries! But you were pitiless in getting
tests/les_miserables.txt:65593:At that moment, Marius slowly opened his eyes, and his glance, still
tests/les_miserables.txt:65594:dimmed by lethargic wonder, rested on M. Gillenormand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65596:“Marius!” cried the old man. “Marius! My little Marius! my child! my
tests/les_miserables.txt:65618:back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65621:that which is expressive of resolution, with arms folded across the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65622:chest; that which is expressive of uncertainty—with the hands behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:65623:the back—had been unknown to him. Now, a change had taken place; his
tests/les_miserables.txt:65628:Nevertheless, he followed one given direction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65630:He took the shortest cut to the Seine, reached the Quai des Ormes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65631:skirted the quay, passed the Grève, and halted at some distance from
tests/les_miserables.txt:65632:the post of the Place du Châtelet, at the angle of the Pont Notre-Dame.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65638:dangerous than this rapid, hemmed in, at that epoch, and irritated by
tests/les_miserables.txt:65640:situated thus close together, augment the peril; the water hurries in
tests/les_miserables.txt:65641:formidable wise through the arches. It rolls in vast and terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:65642:waves; it accumulates and piles up there; the flood attacks the piles
tests/les_miserables.txt:65643:of the bridges as though in an effort to pluck them up with great
tests/les_miserables.txt:65647:Javert leaned both elbows on the parapet, his chin resting in both
tests/les_miserables.txt:65648:hands, and, while his nails were mechanically twined in the abundance
tests/les_miserables.txt:65651:A novelty, a revolution, a catastrophe had just taken place in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65652:depths of his being; and he had something upon which to examine
tests/les_miserables.txt:65657:For several hours, Javert had ceased to be simple. He was troubled;
tests/les_miserables.txt:65658:that brain, so limpid in its blindness, had lost its transparency; that
tests/les_miserables.txt:65659:crystal was clouded. Javert felt duty divided within his conscience,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65660:and he could not conceal the fact from himself. When he had so
tests/les_miserables.txt:65661:unexpectedly encountered Jean Valjean on the banks of the Seine, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:65662:had been in him something of the wolf which regains his grip on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:65668:that the two paths were contrary to each other. One of these straight
tests/les_miserables.txt:65669:lines excluded the other. Which of the two was the true one?
tests/les_miserables.txt:65671:His situation was indescribable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65673:To owe his life to a malefactor, to accept that debt and to repay it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:65674:to be, in spite of himself, on a level with a fugitive from justice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65675:and to repay his service with another service; to allow it to be said
tests/les_miserables.txt:65677:sacrifice to personal motives duty, that general obligation, and to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:65678:conscious, in those personal motives, of something that was also
tests/les_miserables.txt:65679:general, and, perchance, superior, to betray society in order to remain
tests/les_miserables.txt:65680:true to his conscience; that all these absurdities should be realized
tests/les_miserables.txt:65681:and should accumulate upon him,—this was what overwhelmed him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65687:Where did he stand? He sought to comprehend his position, and could no
tests/les_miserables.txt:65691:Jean Valjean at liberty was bad. In the first case, the man of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65692:authority fell lower than the man of the galleys, in the second, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65693:convict rose above the law, and set his foot upon it. In both cases,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65694:dishonor for him, Javert. There was disgrace in any resolution at which
tests/les_miserables.txt:65695:he might arrive. Destiny has some extremities which rise
tests/les_miserables.txt:65696:perpendicularly from the impossible, and beyond which life is no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:65697:anything but a precipice. Javert had reached one of those extremities.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65699:One of his anxieties consisted in being constrained to think. The very
tests/les_miserables.txt:65700:violence of all these conflicting emotions forced him to it. Thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:65701:was something to which he was unused, and which was peculiarly painful.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65703:In thought there always exists a certain amount of internal rebellion;
tests/les_miserables.txt:65706:Thought on any subject whatever, outside of the restricted circle of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65707:his functions, would have been for him in any case useless and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65708:fatigue; thought on the day which had just passed was a torture.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65710:conscience, after such shocks, and render to himself an account of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65714:decide, contrary to all the regulations of the police, contrary to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65715:whole social and judicial organization, contrary to the entire code,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65717:for the affairs of the public; was not this unjustifiable? Every time
tests/les_miserables.txt:65718:that he brought himself face to face with this deed without a name
tests/les_miserables.txt:65719:which he had committed, he trembled from head to foot. Upon what should
tests/les_miserables.txt:65720:he decide? One sole resource remained to him; to return in all haste to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65721:the Rue de l’Homme Armé, and commit Jean Valjean to prison. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:65722:clear that that was what he ought to do. He could not.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65724:Something barred his way in that direction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65727:tribunals, executory sentences, the police and the authorities? Javert
tests/les_miserables.txt:65730:A galley-slave sacred! A convict who could not be touched by the law!
tests/les_miserables.txt:65734:to proceed with vigor, the man made to submit,—that these two men who
tests/les_miserables.txt:65735:were both the things of the law, should have come to such a pass, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:65736:both of them had set themselves above the law? What then! such
tests/les_miserables.txt:65738:stronger than the whole social order, was to remain at liberty, and he,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65741:His reverie gradually became terrible.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65743:He might, athwart this reverie, have also reproached himself on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65744:subject of that insurgent who had been taken to the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:65749:Jean Valjean was the load which weighed upon his spirit.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65751:Jean Valjean disconcerted him. All the axioms which had served him as
tests/les_miserables.txt:65752:points of support all his life long, had crumbled away in the presence
tests/les_miserables.txt:65753:of this man. Jean Valjean’s generosity towards him, Javert, crushed
tests/les_miserables.txt:65754:him. Other facts which he now recalled, and which he had formerly
tests/les_miserables.txt:65755:treated as lies and folly, now recurred to him as realities. M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65757:superposed in such fashion that they now formed but one, which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:65759:soul—admiration for a convict. Respect for a galley-slave—is that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65760:possible thing? He shuddered at it, yet could not escape from it. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:65761:vain did he struggle, he was reduced to confess, in his inmost heart,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65762:the sublimity of that wretch. This was odious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65764:A benevolent malefactor, merciful, gentle, helpful, clement, a convict,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65765:returning good for evil, giving back pardon for hatred, preferring pity
tests/les_miserables.txt:65766:to vengeance, preferring to ruin himself rather than to ruin his enemy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65768:nearly akin to an angel than to a man. Javert was constrained to admit
tests/les_miserables.txt:65771:Things could not go on in this manner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65774:resistance to that monster, to that infamous angel, to that hideous
tests/les_miserables.txt:65775:hero, who enraged almost as much as he amazed him. Twenty times, as he
tests/les_miserables.txt:65776:sat in that carriage face to face with Jean Valjean, the legal tiger
tests/les_miserables.txt:65777:had roared within him. A score of times he had been tempted to fling
tests/les_miserables.txt:65779:to arrest him. What more simple, in fact? To cry out at the first post
tests/les_miserables.txt:65780:that they passed:—“Here is a fugitive from justice, who has broken his
tests/les_miserables.txt:65782:then to go off, leaving that condemned man there, to ignore the rest
tests/les_miserables.txt:65784:of the law; the law may do with him what it will. What could be more
tests/les_miserables.txt:65786:beyond, to act, to apprehend the man, and then, as at present, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:65788:convulsively towards Jean Valjean’s collar, his hand had fallen back
tests/les_miserables.txt:65790:he had heard a voice, a strange voice crying to him:—“It is well.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65792:and wash your claws.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:65795:Then his reflections reverted to himself and beside Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:65798:A convict was his benefactor!
tests/les_miserables.txt:65801:right to be killed in that barricade. He should have asserted that
tests/les_miserables.txt:65803:succor against Jean Valjean, to get himself shot by force.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65805:His supreme anguish was the loss of certainty. He felt that he had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:65806:uprooted. The code was no longer anything more than a stump in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:65807:hand. He had to deal with scruples of an unknown species. There had
tests/les_miserables.txt:65808:taken place within him a sentimental revelation entirely distinct from
tests/les_miserables.txt:65810:in his former uprightness did not suffice. A whole order of unexpected
tests/les_miserables.txt:65811:facts had cropped up and subjugated him. A whole new world was dawning
tests/les_miserables.txt:65812:on his soul: kindness accepted and repaid, devotion, mercy, indulgence,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65813:violences committed by pity on austerity, respect for persons, no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:65814:definitive condemnation, no more conviction, the possibility of a tear
tests/les_miserables.txt:65815:in the eye of the law, no one knows what justice according to God,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65816:running in inverse sense to justice according to men. He perceived amid
tests/les_miserables.txt:65818:and dazzled him. An owl forced to the gaze of an eagle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65820:He said to himself that it was true that there were exceptional cases,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65821:that authority might be put out of countenance, that the rule might be
tests/les_miserables.txt:65822:inadequate in the presence of a fact, that everything could not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:65823:framed within the text of the code, that the unforeseen compelled
tests/les_miserables.txt:65824:obedience, that the virtue of a convict might set a snare for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65825:virtue of the functionary, that destiny did indulge in such ambushes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65826:and he reflected with despair that he himself had not even been
tests/les_miserables.txt:65829:He was forced to acknowledge that goodness did exist. This convict had
tests/les_miserables.txt:65830:been good. And he himself, unprecedented circumstance, had just been
tests/les_miserables.txt:65831:good also. So he was becoming depraved.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65833:He found that he was a coward. He conceived a horror of himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65836:to be irreproachable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65840:How had he come to such a pass? How had all this happened? He could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:65841:have told himself. He clasped his head in both hands, but in spite of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65842:all that he could do, he could not contrive to explain it to himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65844:He had certainly always entertained the intention of restoring Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:65845:Valjean to the law of which Jean Valjean was the captive, and of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:65847:in his grasp had he confessed to himself that he entertained the idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:65848:of releasing him. It was, in some sort, without his consciousness, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:65853:frightened him. He asked himself: “What has that convict done, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:65854:desperate fellow, whom I have pursued even to persecution, and who has
tests/les_miserables.txt:65855:had me under his foot, and who could have avenged himself, and who owed
tests/les_miserables.txt:65856:it both to his rancor and to his safety, in leaving me my life, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:65857:showing mercy upon me? His duty? No. Something more. And I in showing
tests/les_miserables.txt:65858:mercy upon him in my turn—what have I done? My duty? No. Something
tests/les_miserables.txt:65860:balance became disjointed; one of the scales fell into the abyss, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65862:which was on high than by the one which was below. Without being in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65863:least in the world what is called Voltairian or a philosopher, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:65864:incredulous, being, on the contrary, respectful by instinct, towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:65865:the established church, he knew it only as an august fragment of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65866:social whole; order was his dogma, and sufficed for him; ever since he
tests/les_miserables.txt:65867:had attained to man’s estate and the rank of a functionary, he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:65868:centred nearly all his religion in the police. Being,—and here we
tests/les_miserables.txt:65870:acceptation, being, as we have said, a spy as other men are priests. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:65874:This new chief, God, he became unexpectedly conscious of, and he felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:65875:embarrassed by him. This unforeseen presence threw him off his
tests/les_miserables.txt:65877:not ignorant of the fact that the subordinate is bound always to bow,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65878:that he must not disobey, nor find fault, nor discuss, and that, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65879:presence of a superior who amazes him too greatly, the inferior has no
tests/les_miserables.txt:65880:other resource than that of handing in his resignation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65885:constantly,—one fact dominated everything else for him, and that was,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65886:that he had just committed a terrible infraction of the law. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:65887:just shut his eyes on an escaped convict who had broken his ban. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:65890:understood himself. The very reasons for his action escaped him; only
tests/les_miserables.txt:65892:that blind faith which gloomy probity engenders. This faith had quitted
tests/les_miserables.txt:65894:away. Truths which he did not wish to recognize were besieging him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65895:inexorably. Henceforth, he must be a different man. He was suffering
tests/les_miserables.txt:65896:from the strange pains of a conscience abruptly operated on for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65897:cataract. He saw that which it was repugnant to him to behold. He felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:65902:A terrible situation! to be touched.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65904:To be granite and to doubt! to be the statue of Chastisement cast in
tests/les_miserables.txt:65905:one piece in the mould of the law, and suddenly to become aware of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65906:fact that one cherishes beneath one’s breast of bronze something absurd
tests/les_miserables.txt:65907:and disobedient which almost resembles a heart! To come to the pass of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65909:day that that good is evil! to be the watch-dog, and to lick the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65910:intruder’s hand! to be ice and melt! to be the pincers and to turn into
tests/les_miserables.txt:65914:The man-projectile no longer acquainted with his route and retreating!
tests/les_miserables.txt:65916:To be obliged to confess this to oneself: infallibility is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:65918:when a code speaks, society is not perfect, authority is complicated
tests/les_miserables.txt:65919:with vacillation, a crack is possible in the immutable, judges are but
tests/les_miserables.txt:65923:That which was passing in Javert was the Fampoux of a rectilinear
tests/les_miserables.txt:65924:conscience, the derailment of a soul, the crushing of a probity which
tests/les_miserables.txt:65925:had been irresistibly launched in a straight line and was breaking
tests/les_miserables.txt:65926:against God. It certainly was singular that the stoker of order, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:65928:rigid road, could be unseated by a flash of light! that the immovable,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65929:the direct, the correct, the geometrical, the passive, the perfect,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65930:could bend! that there should exist for the locomotive a road to
tests/les_miserables.txt:65931:Damascus!
tests/les_miserables.txt:65933:God, always within man, and refractory, He, the true conscience, to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65935:remember the sun; an injunction to the soul to recognize the veritable
tests/les_miserables.txt:65936:absolute when confronted with the fictitious absolute, humanity which
tests/les_miserables.txt:65937:cannot be lost; the human heart indestructible; that splendid
tests/les_miserables.txt:65939:Javert understand this? Did Javert penetrate it? Did Javert account for
tests/les_miserables.txt:65941:incontestable incomprehensibility he felt his brain bursting.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65943:He was less the man transfigured than the victim of this prodigy. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:65944:all this he perceived only the tremendous difficulty of existence. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:65945:seemed to him that, henceforth, his respiration was repressed forever.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65946:He was not accustomed to having something unknown hanging over his
tests/les_miserables.txt:65950:smooth, limpid and simple surface; there was nothing incomprehensible,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65951:nothing obscure; nothing that was not defined, regularly disposed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65952:linked, precise, circumscribed, exact, limited, closed, fully provided
tests/les_miserables.txt:65953:for; authority was a plane surface; there was no fall in it, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:65954:dizziness in its presence. Javert had never beheld the unknown except
tests/les_miserables.txt:65956:chaos, the possible slip over a precipice—this was the work of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65957:lower regions, of rebels, of the wicked, of wretches. Now Javert threw
tests/les_miserables.txt:65958:himself back, and he was suddenly terrified by this unprecedented
tests/les_miserables.txt:65961:What! one was dismantled from top to bottom! one was disconcerted,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65962:absolutely! In what could one trust! That which had been agreed upon
tests/les_miserables.txt:65963:was giving way! What! the defect in society’s armor could be discovered
tests/les_miserables.txt:65964:by a magnanimous wretch! What! an honest servitor of the law could
tests/les_miserables.txt:65965:suddenly find himself caught between two crimes—the crime of allowing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65966:man to escape and the crime of arresting him! everything was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:65967:settled in the orders given by the State to the functionary! There
tests/les_miserables.txt:65969:that an ex-ruffian, weighed down with convictions, could rise erect and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65970:end by being in the right? Was this credible? were there cases in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:65971:the law should retire before transfigured crime, and stammer its
tests/les_miserables.txt:65972:excuses?—Yes, that was the state of the case! and Javert saw it! and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65973:Javert had touched it! and not only could he not deny it, but he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:65974:taken part in it. These were realities. It was abominable that actual
tests/les_miserables.txt:65975:facts could reach such deformity. If facts did their duty, they would
tests/les_miserables.txt:65976:confine themselves to being proofs of the law; facts—it is God who
tests/les_miserables.txt:65977:sends them. Was anarchy, then, on the point of now descending from on
tests/les_miserables.txt:65980:Thus,—and in the exaggeration of anguish, and the optical illusion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65981:consternation, all that might have corrected and restrained this
tests/les_miserables.txt:65982:impression was effaced, and society, and the human race, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:65983:universe were, henceforth, summed up in his eyes, in one simple and
tests/les_miserables.txt:65984:terrible feature,—thus the penal laws, the thing judged, the force due
tests/les_miserables.txt:65985:to legislation, the decrees of the sovereign courts, the magistracy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:65986:the government, prevention, repression, official cruelty, wisdom, legal
tests/les_miserables.txt:65987:infallibility, the principle of authority, all the dogmas on which rest
tests/les_miserables.txt:65988:political and civil security, sovereignty, justice, public truth, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:65989:this was rubbish, a shapeless mass, chaos; he himself, Javert, the spy
tests/les_miserables.txt:65990:of order, incorruptibility in the service of the police, the bull-dog
tests/les_miserables.txt:65991:providence of society, vanquished and hurled to earth; and, erect, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:65992:the summit of all that ruin, a man with a green cap on his head and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65993:halo round his brow; this was the astounding confusion to which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:65994:come; this was the fearful vision which he bore within his soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:65998:A violent state, if ever such existed. There were only two ways of
tests/les_miserables.txt:65999:escaping from it. One was to go resolutely to Jean Valjean, and restore
tests/les_miserables.txt:66000:to his cell the convict from the galleys. The other....
tests/les_miserables.txt:66002:Javert quitted the parapet, and, with head erect this time, betook
tests/les_miserables.txt:66003:himself, with a firm tread, towards the station-house indicated by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66004:lantern at one of the corners of the Place du Châtelet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66006:On arriving there, he saw through the window a sergeant of police, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66007:he entered. Policemen recognize each other by the very way in which
tests/les_miserables.txt:66009:showed his card to the sergeant, and seated himself at the table of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66010:post on which a candle was burning. On a table lay a pen, a leaden
tests/les_miserables.txt:66012:orders of the night patrols. This table, still completed by its
tests/les_miserables.txt:66013:straw-seated chair, is an institution; it exists in all police
tests/les_miserables.txt:66014:stations; it is invariably ornamented with a box-wood saucer filled
tests/les_miserables.txt:66015:with sawdust and a wafer box of cardboard filled with red wafers, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66016:it forms the lowest stage of official style. It is there that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66024:“In the first place:  I beg Monsieur le Préfet to cast his eyes on
tests/les_miserables.txt:66027:“Secondly:  prisoners, on arriving after examination, take off their
tests/les_miserables.txt:66029:searched.  Many of them cough on their return to prison. This entails
tests/les_miserables.txt:66032:“Thirdly:  the mode of keeping track of a man with relays of police
tests/les_miserables.txt:66033:agents from distance to distance, is good, but, on important occasions,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66035:each other, so that, in case one agent should, for any cause, grow weak
tests/les_miserables.txt:66036:in his service, the other may supervise him and take his place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66038:“Fourthly:  it is inexplicable why the special regulation of the prison
tests/les_miserables.txt:66039:of the Madelonettes interdicts the prisoner from having a chair, even
tests/les_miserables.txt:66042:“Fifthly:  in the Madelonettes there are only two bars to the canteen,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66043:so that the canteen woman can touch the prisoners with her hand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66045:“Sixthly:  the prisoners called barkers, who summon the other prisoners
tests/les_miserables.txt:66046:to the parlor, force the prisoner to pay them two sous to call his name
tests/les_miserables.txt:66047:distinctly.  This is a theft.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66050:shop; this is an abuse of the contractor, since the cloth is none the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66053:“Eighthly:  it is annoying for visitors to La Force to be obliged to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66054:traverse the boys’ court in order to reach the parlor of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66057:“Ninthly:  it is a fact that any day gendarmes can be overheard
tests/les_miserables.txt:66058:relating in the court-yard of the prefecture the interrogations put by
tests/les_miserables.txt:66060:secrecy, to repeat what he has heard in the examination room is a grave
tests/les_miserables.txt:66063:“Tenthly:  Mme. Henry is an honest woman; her canteen is very neat; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:66064:it is bad to have a woman keep the wicket to the mouse-trap of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66065:secret cells.  This is unworthy of the Conciergerie of a great
tests/les_miserables.txt:66066:civilization.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66069:Javert wrote these lines in his calmest and most correct chirography,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66070:not omitting a single comma, and making the paper screech under his
tests/les_miserables.txt:66075:“Inspector of the 1st class.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66077:“The Post of the Place du Châtelet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66079:“June 7th, 1832, about one o’clock in the morning.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66084:sealed it, wrote on the back: _Note for the administration_, left it on
tests/les_miserables.txt:66088:Again he traversed the Place du Châtelet diagonally, regained the quay,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66089:and returned with automatic precision to the very point which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:66094:The darkness was complete. It was the sepulchral moment which follows
tests/les_miserables.txt:66095:midnight. A ceiling of clouds concealed the stars. Not a single light
tests/les_miserables.txt:66096:burned in the houses of the city; no one was passing; all of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66097:streets and quays which could be seen were deserted; Notre-Dame and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66100:lay shapeless in the mist one behind the other. Recent rains had
tests/les_miserables.txt:66104:precisely over the rapids of the Seine, perpendicularly above that
tests/les_miserables.txt:66105:formidable spiral of whirlpools which loose and knot themselves again
tests/les_miserables.txt:66106:like an endless screw.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66108:Javert bent his head and gazed. All was black. Nothing was to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:66109:distinguished. A sound of foam was audible; but the river could not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:66112:knows whence, and converting it into a snake. The light vanished, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66113:all became indistinct once more. Immensity seemed thrown open there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66115:abrupt, confused, mingled with the vapors, instantly concealed from
tests/les_miserables.txt:66116:sight, produced the effect of an escarpment of the infinite. Nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:66117:was to be seen, but the hostile chill of the water and the stale odor
tests/les_miserables.txt:66118:of the wet stones could be felt. A fierce breath rose from this abyss.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66119:The flood in the river, divined rather than perceived, the tragic
tests/les_miserables.txt:66120:whispering of the waves, the melancholy vastness of the arches of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66125:of shadow; he considered the invisible with a fixity that resembled
tests/les_miserables.txt:66126:attention. The water roared. All at once he took off his hat and placed
tests/les_miserables.txt:66127:it on the edge of the quay. A moment later, a tall black figure, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:66128:a belated passer-by in the distance might have taken for a phantom,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66129:appeared erect upon the parapet of the quay, bent over towards the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66131:shadows; a dull splash followed; and the shadow alone was in the secret
tests/les_miserables.txt:66132:of the convulsions of that obscure form which had disappeared beneath
tests/les_miserables.txt:66146:Some time after the events which we have just recorded, Sieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:66147:Boulatruelle experienced a lively emotion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66152:Boulatruelle, as the reader may, perchance, recall, was a man who was
tests/les_miserables.txt:66153:occupied with divers and troublesome matters. He broke stones and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66156:Road-mender and thief as he was, he cherished one dream; he believed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:66159:lived to search the pockets of passers-by.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66161:Nevertheless, for an instant, he was prudent. He had just escaped
tests/les_miserables.txt:66162:neatly. He had been, as the reader is aware, picked up in Jondrette’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:66163:garret in company with the other ruffians. Utility of a vice: his
tests/les_miserables.txt:66167:well authenticated state of intoxication on the evening of the ambush,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66170:supervision, broken stone for the good of the state, with downcast
tests/les_miserables.txt:66171:mien, in a very pensive mood, his ardor for theft somewhat cooled; but
tests/les_miserables.txt:66172:he was addicted nonetheless tenderly to the wine which had recently
tests/les_miserables.txt:66175:As for the lively emotion which he had experienced a short time after
tests/les_miserables.txt:66176:his return to his road-mender’s turf-thatched cot, here it is:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66179:work, and possibly also to his ambush, a little before daybreak caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:66180:sight, through the branches of the trees, of a man, whose back alone he
tests/les_miserables.txt:66182:distance and in the early dusk, was not entirely unfamiliar to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66183:Boulatruelle, although intoxicated, had a correct and lucid memory, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66185:conflict with legal order.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66187:“Where the deuce have I seen something like that man yonder?” he said
tests/les_miserables.txt:66188:to himself. But he could make himself no answer, except that the man
tests/les_miserables.txt:66189:resembled some one of whom his memory preserved a confused trace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66191:However, apart from the identity which he could not manage to catch,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66192:Boulatruelle put things together and made calculations. This man did
tests/les_miserables.txt:66193:not belong in the country-side. He had just arrived there. On foot,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66194:evidently. No public conveyance passes through Montfermeil at that
tests/les_miserables.txt:66195:hour. He had walked all night. Whence came he? Not from a very great
tests/les_miserables.txt:66196:distance; for he had neither haversack, nor bundle. From Paris, no
tests/les_miserables.txt:66197:doubt. Why was he in these woods? why was he there at such an hour?
tests/les_miserables.txt:66198:what had he come there for?
tests/les_miserables.txt:66200:Boulatruelle thought of the treasure. By dint of ransacking his memory,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66201:he recalled in a vague way that he had already, many years before, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:66202:a similar alarm in connection with a man who produced on him the effect
tests/les_miserables.txt:66205:“By the deuce,” said Boulatruelle, “I’ll find him again. I’ll discover
tests/les_miserables.txt:66207:reason, and I’ll know it. People can’t have secrets in my forest if I
tests/les_miserables.txt:66211:He took his pick-axe which was very sharply pointed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66213:“There now,” he grumbled, “is something that will search the earth and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66218:march at his best pace in the direction which the man must follow, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66219:set out across the thickets.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66221:When he had compassed a hundred strides, the day, which was already
tests/les_miserables.txt:66222:beginning to break, came to his assistance. Footprints stamped in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66223:sand, weeds trodden down here and there, heather crushed, young
tests/les_miserables.txt:66224:branches in the brushwood bent and in the act of straightening
tests/les_miserables.txt:66225:themselves up again with the graceful deliberation of the arms of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66226:pretty woman who stretches herself when she wakes, pointed out to him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66227:sort of track. He followed it, then lost it. Time was flying. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:66228:plunged deeper into the woods and came to a sort of eminence. An early
tests/les_miserables.txt:66229:huntsman who was passing in the distance along a path, whistling the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66230:air of Guillery, suggested to him the idea of climbing a tree. Old as
tests/les_miserables.txt:66231:he was, he was agile. There stood close at hand a beech-tree of great
tests/les_miserables.txt:66232:size, worthy of Tityrus and of Boulatruelle. Boulatruelle ascended the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66233:beech as high as he was able.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66235:The idea was a good one. On scrutinizing the solitary waste on the side
tests/les_miserables.txt:66237:suddenly caught sight of his man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66242:considerable distance, masked by large trees, but with which
tests/les_miserables.txt:66243:Boulatruelle was perfectly familiar, on account of having noticed, near
tests/les_miserables.txt:66244:a large pile of porous stones, an ailing chestnut-tree bandaged with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66245:sheet of zinc nailed directly upon the bark. This glade was the one
tests/les_miserables.txt:66246:which was formerly called the Blaru-bottom. The heap of stones,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66247:destined for no one knows what employment, which was visible there
tests/les_miserables.txt:66249:stones in longevity, unless it is a board fence. They are temporary
tests/les_miserables.txt:66252:Boulatruelle, with the rapidity of joy, dropped rather than descended
tests/les_miserables.txt:66256:It was no small matter to reach that glade. By the beaten paths, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:66258:hour. In a bee-line, through the underbrush, which is peculiarly dense,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66259:very thorny, and very aggressive in that locality, a full half hour was
tests/les_miserables.txt:66260:necessary. Boulatruelle committed the error of not comprehending this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66261:He believed in the straight line; a respectable optical illusion which
tests/les_miserables.txt:66262:ruins many a man. The thicket, bristling as it was, struck him as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66267:Boulatruelle, accustomed to taking crooked courses, was on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:66268:occasion guilty of the fault of going straight.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66273:thistles, and very irascible brambles. He was much lacerated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66275:At the bottom of the ravine he found water which he was obliged to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66278:At last he reached the Blaru-bottom, after the lapse of forty minutes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66279:sweating, soaked, breathless, scratched, and ferocious.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66282:stones. It was in its place. It had not been carried off.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66284:As for the man, he had vanished in the forest. He had made his escape.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66285:Where? in what direction? into what thicket? Impossible to guess.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66288:the tree with the sheet of zinc, was freshly turned earth, a pick-axe,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66303:lay in a fever accompanied by delirium, and by tolerably grave cerebral
tests/les_miserables.txt:66304:symptoms, caused more by the shocks of the wounds on the head than by
tests/les_miserables.txt:66307:He repeated Cosette’s name for whole nights in the melancholy loquacity
tests/les_miserables.txt:66308:of fever, and with the sombre obstinacy of agony. The extent of some of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66310:being always liable to become re-absorbed, and consequently, to kill
tests/les_miserables.txt:66311:the sick man, under certain atmospheric conditions; at every change of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66312:weather, at the slightest storm, the physician was uneasy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66314:“Above all things,” he repeated, “let the wounded man be subjected to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66315:no emotion.” The dressing of the wounds was complicated and difficult,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66316:the fixation of apparatus and bandages by cerecloths not having been
tests/les_miserables.txt:66317:invented as yet, at that epoch. Nicolette used up a sheet “as big as
tests/les_miserables.txt:66318:the ceiling,” as she put it, for lint. It was not without difficulty
tests/les_miserables.txt:66319:that the chloruretted lotions and the nitrate of silver overcame the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66324:Every day, sometimes twice a day, a very well dressed gentleman with
tests/les_miserables.txt:66325:white hair,—such was the description given by the porter,—came to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66326:inquire about the wounded man, and left a large package of lint for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66330:sorrowful night when he had been brought back to his grandfather in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66331:dying condition, the doctor declared that he would answer for Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66332:Convalescence began. But Marius was forced to remain for two months
tests/les_miserables.txt:66333:more stretched out on a long chair, on account of the results called up
tests/les_miserables.txt:66334:by the fracture of his collar-bone. There always is a last wound like
tests/les_miserables.txt:66335:that which will not close, and which prolongs the dressings
tests/les_miserables.txt:66336:indefinitely, to the great annoyance of the sick person.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66338:However, this long illness and this long convalescence saved him from
tests/les_miserables.txt:66339:all pursuit. In France, there is no wrath, not even of a public
tests/les_miserables.txt:66340:character, which six months will not extinguish. Revolts, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66341:present state of society, are so much the fault of every one, that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:66342:are followed by a certain necessity of shutting the eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66344:Let us add, that the inexcusable Gisquet order, which enjoined doctors
tests/les_miserables.txt:66345:to lodge information against the wounded, having outraged public
tests/les_miserables.txt:66347:were covered and protected by this indignation; and, with the exception
tests/les_miserables.txt:66348:of those who had been made prisoners in the very act of combat, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66349:councils of war did not dare to trouble any one. So Marius was left in
tests/les_miserables.txt:66350:peace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66353:through every form of ecstasy. It was found difficult to prevent his
tests/les_miserables.txt:66354:passing every night beside the wounded man; he had his big armchair
tests/les_miserables.txt:66355:carried to Marius’ bedside; he required his daughter to take the finest
tests/les_miserables.txt:66356:linen in the house for compresses and bandages. Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:66357:Gillenormand, like a sage and elderly person, contrived to spare the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66360:the preparation of lint batiste is not nearly so good as coarse linen,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66362:wounds from which Mademoiselle Gillenormand modestly absented herself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66363:When the dead flesh was cut away with scissors, he said: “Aïe! aïe!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66364:Nothing was more touching than to see him with his gentle, senile
tests/les_miserables.txt:66365:palsy, offer the wounded man a cup of his cooling-draught. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:66366:overwhelmed the doctor with questions. He did not observe that he asked
tests/les_miserables.txt:66369:On the day when the doctor announced to him that Marius was out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66371:three louis. That evening, on his return to his own chamber, he danced
tests/les_miserables.txt:66372:a gavotte, using his thumb and forefinger as castanets, and he sang the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66376:Vrai nid d’une bergère;       Car c’est dans sa prunelle
tests/les_miserables.txt:66377:J’adore son jupon,            Que tu mets ton carquois.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66380:“Moi, je la chante, et j’aime,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66386:Then he knelt upon a chair, and Basque, who was watching him through
tests/les_miserables.txt:66391:At each succeeding phase of improvement, which became more and more
tests/les_miserables.txt:66392:pronounced, the grandfather raved. He executed a multitude of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66393:mechanical actions full of joy; he ascended and descended the stairs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66395:receiving a big bouquet; it was M. Gillenormand who had sent it to her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66396:The husband made a jealous scene. M. Gillenormand tried to draw
tests/les_miserables.txt:66397:Nicolette upon his knees. He called Marius, “M. le Baron.” He shouted:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66398:“Long live the Republic!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66401:Every moment, he kept asking the doctor: “Is he no longer in danger?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66404:himself an account of himself. Marius was the master of the house,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66405:there was abdication in his joy, he was the grandson of his grandson.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66407:In the state of joy in which he then was, he was the most venerable of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66408:children. In his fear lest he might fatigue or annoy the convalescent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66409:he stepped behind him to smile. He was content, joyous, delighted,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66410:charming, young. His white locks added a gentle majesty to the gay
tests/les_miserables.txt:66411:radiance of his visage. When grace is mingled with wrinkles, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:66412:adorable. There is an indescribable aurora in beaming old age.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66414:As for Marius, as he allowed them to dress his wounds and care for him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66417:After the fever and delirium had left him, he did not again pronounce
tests/les_miserables.txt:66419:her. He held his peace, precisely because his soul was there.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66421:He did not know what had become of Cosette; the whole affair of the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:66422:de la Chanvrerie was like a cloud in his memory; shadows that were
tests/les_miserables.txt:66423:almost indistinct, floated through his mind, Éponine, Gavroche, Mabeuf,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66425:of the barricade; the strange passage of M. Fauchelevent through that
tests/les_miserables.txt:66426:adventure produced on him the effect of a puzzle in a tempest; he
tests/les_miserables.txt:66427:understood nothing connected with his own life, he did not know how nor
tests/les_miserables.txt:66430:home at night in a hackney-coach, to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire;
tests/les_miserables.txt:66432:idea; but in that fog there was one immovable point, one clear and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66433:precise outline, something made of granite, a resolution, a will; to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66434:find Cosette once more. For him, the idea of life was not distinct from
tests/les_miserables.txt:66435:the idea of Cosette. He had decreed in his heart that he would not
tests/les_miserables.txt:66436:accept the one without the other, and he was immovably resolved to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66437:exact of any person whatever, who should desire to force him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66441:He did not conceal from himself the fact that obstacles existed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66444:little softened by all the solicitude and tenderness of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:66445:grandfather. In the first place, he was not in the secret; then, in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:66446:reveries of an invalid, which were still feverish, possibly, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:66447:distrusted this tenderness as a strange and novel thing, which had for
tests/les_miserables.txt:66448:its object his conquest. He remained cold. The grandfather absolutely
tests/les_miserables.txt:66450:so long as he, Marius, did not speak, and let things take their course;
tests/les_miserables.txt:66451:but that when it became a question of Cosette, he would find another
tests/les_miserables.txt:66452:face, and that his grandfather’s true attitude would be unmasked. Then
tests/les_miserables.txt:66453:there would be an unpleasant scene; a recrudescence of family
tests/les_miserables.txt:66454:questions, a confrontation of positions, every sort of sarcasm and all
tests/les_miserables.txt:66455:manner of objections at one and the same time, Fauchelevent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66456:Coupelevent, fortune, poverty, a stone about his neck, the future.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66457:Violent resistance; conclusion: a refusal. Marius stiffened himself in
tests/les_miserables.txt:66458:advance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66460:And then, in proportion as he regained life, the old ulcers of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:66461:memory opened once more, he reflected again on the past, Colonel
tests/les_miserables.txt:66462:Pontmercy placed himself once more between M. Gillenormand and him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66463:Marius, he told himself that he had no true kindness to expect from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66467:without however allowing it to appear, observed that Marius, ever since
tests/les_miserables.txt:66468:the latter had been brought back to him and had regained consciousness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66469:had not once called him father. It is true that he did not say
tests/les_miserables.txt:66470:“monsieur” to him; but he contrived not to say either the one or the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66471:other, by means of a certain way of turning his phrases. Obviously, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66472:crisis was approaching.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66474:As almost always happens in such cases, Marius skirmished before giving
tests/les_miserables.txt:66475:battle, by way of proving himself. This is called “feeling the ground.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66476:One morning it came to pass that M. Gillenormand spoke slightingly of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66477:the Convention, apropos of a newspaper which had fallen into his hands,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66480:The old man held his peace, and uttered not a sound during the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66484:of his early years, interpreted this silence as a profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:66485:concentration of wrath, augured from it a hot conflict, and augmented
tests/les_miserables.txt:66486:his preparations for the fray in the inmost recesses of his mind.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66488:He decided that, in case of a refusal, he would tear off his bandages,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66489:dislocate his collar-bone, that he would lay bare all the wounds which
tests/les_miserables.txt:66490:he had left, and would reject all food. His wounds were his munitions
tests/les_miserables.txt:66493:He awaited the propitious moment with the crafty patience of the sick.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66504:phials and cups on the marble of the commode, bent over Marius and said
tests/les_miserables.txt:66505:to him in his tenderest accents: “Look here, my little Marius, if I
tests/les_miserables.txt:66506:were in your place, I would eat meat now in preference to fish. A fried
tests/les_miserables.txt:66507:sole is excellent to begin a convalescence with, but a good cutlet is
tests/les_miserables.txt:66508:needed to put a sick man on his feet.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66511:Marius, who had almost entirely recovered his strength, collected the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66513:clenched fists on the sheets of his bed, looked his grandfather in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66514:face, assumed a terrible air, and said:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66533:Marius, stunned and overwhelmed with the dazzling shock, trembled in
tests/les_miserables.txt:66538:“Yes, you shall have her, that pretty little girl of yours. She comes
tests/les_miserables.txt:66540:since you were wounded, she has passed her time in weeping and making
tests/les_miserables.txt:66543:You’re caught. You had arranged your little plot, you had said to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66545:that mummy of the Regency and of the Directory, to that ancient beau,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66549:eaten of the bread of spring; he certainly must remember it.’ Ah! you
tests/les_miserables.txt:66550:take the cockchafer by the horns. That’s good. I offer you a cutlet and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66552:you! Ah! you reckoned on a bickering! You do not know that I am an old
tests/les_miserables.txt:66553:coward. What do you say to that? You are vexed? You did not expect to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66555:the discourse which you meant to bestow upon me, Mr. Lawyer, and that’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:66556:vexatious. Well, so much the worse, rage away. I’ll do whatever you
tests/les_miserables.txt:66557:wish, and that cuts you short, imbecile! Listen. I have made my
tests/les_miserables.txt:66558:inquiries, I’m cunning too; she is charming, she is discreet, it is not
tests/les_miserables.txt:66559:true about the lancer, she has made heaps of lint, she’s a jewel, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:66561:coffin would have accompanied mine. I have had an idea, ever since you
tests/les_miserables.txt:66563:only in romances that young girls are brought to the bedsides of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66566:time, my good fellow. Ask Nicolette, who has not left you for a moment,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66568:would the doctor have said? A pretty girl does not cure a man of fever.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66570:all’s done, it’s all settled, take her. Such is my ferocity. You see, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:66571:perceived that you did not love me. I said to myself: ‘Here now, I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:66575:a big voice, to shout no, and to lift his cane at all that aurora. Not
tests/les_miserables.txt:66578:well-beloved child.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66587:“Father!” cried Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66591:An ineffable moment ensued. They were choking and could not speak.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66617:“Well, to-day then. Let it be to-day. You have called me ‘father’ three
tests/les_miserables.txt:66621:André Chénier whose throat was cut by the ras . . . by the giants of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66625:M. Gillenormand fancied that he detected a faint frown on the part of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66629:The grandfather, trembling at having so inopportunely introduced André
tests/les_miserables.txt:66630:Chénier, resumed precipitately:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66632:“Cut his throat is not the word. The fact is that the great
tests/les_miserables.txt:66633:revolutionary geniuses, who were not malicious, that is incontestable,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66637:of public safety, to be so good as to go....”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66640:M. Gillenormand, clutched by the throat by his own phrase, could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:66641:proceed. Being able neither to finish it nor to retract it, while his
tests/les_miserables.txt:66643:many emotions, the old man rushed headlong, with as much rapidity as
tests/les_miserables.txt:66644:his age permitted, from the bed-chamber, shut the door behind him, and,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66645:purple, choking and foaming at the mouth, his eyes starting from his
tests/les_miserables.txt:66647:blacking boots in the anteroom. He seized Basque by the collar, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66648:shouted full in his face in fury:—“By the hundred thousand Javottes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66668:Cosette and Marius beheld each other once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66670:What that interview was like we decline to say. There are things which
tests/les_miserables.txt:66671:one must not attempt to depict; the sun is one of them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66673:The entire family, including Basque and Nicolette, were assembled in
tests/les_miserables.txt:66674:Marius’ chamber at the moment when Cosette entered it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66676:Precisely at that moment, the grandfather was on the point of blowing
tests/les_miserables.txt:66677:his nose; he stopped short, holding his nose in his handkerchief, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66683:“Adorable!” he exclaimed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66687:Cosette was intoxicated, delighted, frightened, in heaven. She was as
tests/les_miserables.txt:66688:thoroughly alarmed as any one can be by happiness. She stammered all
tests/les_miserables.txt:66690:dared not. Ashamed of loving in the presence of all these people.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66697:It was “Monsieur Fauchelevent”; it was Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66699:He was very well dressed, as the porter had said, entirely in black, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:66700:perfectly new garments, and with a white cravat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66702:The porter was a thousand leagues from recognizing in this correct
tests/les_miserables.txt:66704:corpse, who had sprung up at his door on the night of the 7th of June,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66705:tattered, muddy, hideous, haggard, his face masked in blood and mire,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66706:supporting in his arms the fainting Marius; still, his porter’s scent
tests/les_miserables.txt:66707:was aroused. When M. Fauchelevent arrived with Cosette, the porter had
tests/les_miserables.txt:66708:not been able to refrain from communicating to his wife this aside: “I
tests/les_miserables.txt:66709:don’t know why it is, but I can’t help fancying that I’ve seen that
tests/les_miserables.txt:66710:face before.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66713:M. Fauchelevent in Marius’ chamber, remained apart near the door. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:66714:had under his arm, a package which bore considerable resemblance to an
tests/les_miserables.txt:66715:octavo volume enveloped in paper. The enveloping paper was of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66720:tone of Nicolette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66724:Boulard, one of my acquaintances, never walked out without a book under
tests/les_miserables.txt:66731:“Monsieur Tranchelevent....”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66735:proper names was an aristocratic habit of his.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66737:“Monsieur Tranchelevent, I have the honor of asking you, on behalf of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66738:my grandson, Baron Marius Pontmercy, for the hand of Mademoiselle.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66741:Monsieur Tranchelevent bowed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66746:blessing, he cried:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66748:“Permission to adore each other!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66751:They did not require him to repeat it twice. So much the worse! the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66752:chirping began. They talked low. Marius, resting on his elbow on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:66753:reclining chair, Cosette standing beside him. “Oh, heavens!” murmured
tests/les_miserables.txt:66754:Cosette, “I see you once again! it is thou! it is you! The idea of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66756:for four months. Oh! how wicked it was of you to go to that battle!
tests/les_miserables.txt:66758:little while ago, when they came to tell us to come to you, I still
tests/les_miserables.txt:66761:looks! What will your relatives say to see me in a crumpled collar? Do
tests/les_miserables.txt:66764:that you could put your fist in it. And then, it seems that they cut
tests/les_miserables.txt:66765:your flesh with the scissors. That is frightful. I have cried till I
tests/les_miserables.txt:66766:have no eyes left. It is queer that a person can suffer like that. Your
tests/les_miserables.txt:66772:the time; stay, sir, look, it is your fault, I have a callous on my
tests/les_miserables.txt:66778:_Angel_ is the only word in the language which cannot be worn out. No
tests/les_miserables.txt:66779:other word could resist the merciless use which lovers make of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66781:Then as there were spectators, they paused and said not a word more,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66782:contenting themselves with softly touching each other’s hands.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66784:M. Gillenormand turned towards those who were in the room and cried:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66787:scenes. Come, a little uproar, the deuce! so that the children can
tests/les_miserables.txt:66788:chatter at their ease.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66791:And, approaching Marius and Cosette, he said to them in a very low
tests/les_miserables.txt:66792:voice:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66794:“Call each other _thou_. Don’t stand on ceremony.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66799:amazement; it was not the least in the world like the scandalized and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66800:envious glance of an owl at two turtledoves, it was the stupid eye of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66801:poor innocent seven and fifty years of age; it was a life which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:66816:to have that all to yourself, you scamp! Ah! my rogue, you are getting
tests/les_miserables.txt:66817:off nicely with me, you are happy; if I were not fifteen years too old,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66818:we would fight with swords to see which of us should have her. Come
tests/les_miserables.txt:66819:now! I am in love with you, mademoiselle. It’s perfectly simple. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:66820:your right. You are in the right. Ah! what a sweet, charming little
tests/les_miserables.txt:66821:wedding this will make! Our parish is Saint-Denis du Saint Sacrament,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66822:but I will get a dispensation so that you can be married at Saint-Paul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66823:The church is better. It was built by the Jesuits. It is more
tests/les_miserables.txt:66824:coquettish. It is opposite the fountain of Cardinal de Birague. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:66825:masterpiece of Jesuit architecture is at Namur. It is called
tests/les_miserables.txt:66828:marry; that is what they are made for. There is a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:66829:Sainte-Catherine whom I should always like to see uncoiffed.62 It’s a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66830:fine thing to remain a spinster, but it is chilly. The Bible says:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66831:Multiply. In order to save the people, Jeanne d’Arc is needed; but in
tests/les_miserables.txt:66834:that they have their chapel apart in the church, and that they fall
tests/les_miserables.txt:66835:back on the Society of the Virgin; but, sapristi, a handsome husband, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66839:the while like the dawn,—that’s better than holding a candle at
tests/les_miserables.txt:66840:vespers, and chanting _Turris Eburnea!_”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66843:The grandfather executed a pirouette on his eighty-year-old heels, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:66844:began to talk again like a spring that has broken loose once more:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66846:“Ainsi, bornant les cours de tes rêvasseries,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66847:Alcippe, il est donc vrai, dans peu tu te maries.”63
tests/les_miserables.txt:66859:“Yes, Courfeyrac.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66862:“What has become of him?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66874:“She is exquisite, this darling. She’s a masterpiece, this Cosette! She
tests/les_miserables.txt:66876:Baroness, which is a come down for her; she was born a Marquise. What
tests/les_miserables.txt:66877:eyelashes she has! Get it well fixed in your noddles, my children, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:66878:you are in the true road. Love each other. Be foolish about it. Love is
tests/les_miserables.txt:66879:the folly of men and the wit of God. Adore each other. Only,” he added,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66880:suddenly becoming gloomy, “what a misfortune! It has just occurred to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66882:long as I live, it will not matter, but after my death, a score of
tests/les_miserables.txt:66883:years hence, ah! my poor children, you will not have a sou! Your
tests/les_miserables.txt:66887:At this point they heard a grave and tranquil voice say:
tests/les_miserables.txt:66889:“Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent possesses six hundred thousand
tests/les_miserables.txt:66890:francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66893:It was the voice of Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66896:he was there, and he had remained standing erect and motionless, behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:66904:“Six hundred thousand francs?” resumed M. Gillenormand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66906:“Minus fourteen or fifteen thousand francs, possibly,” said Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:66909:And he laid on the table the package which Mademoiselle Gillenormand
tests/les_miserables.txt:66912:Jean Valjean himself opened the package; it was a bundle of bank-notes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66913:They were turned over and counted. There were five hundred notes for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66914:thousand francs each, and one hundred and sixty-eight of five hundred.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66915:In all, five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66919:“Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs!” murmured the aunt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66925:studentesses with six hundred thousand francs. Cherubino works better
tests/les_miserables.txt:66926:than Rothschild.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:66929:“Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs!” repeated Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:66934:As for Marius and Cosette, they were gazing at each other while this
tests/les_miserables.txt:66943:The reader has, no doubt, understood, without necessitating a lengthy
tests/les_miserables.txt:66945:able, thanks to his first escape of a few days’ duration, to come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:66948:Montreuil-sur-Mer; and that fearing that he might be recaptured,—which
tests/les_miserables.txt:66950:Montfermeil, in the locality known as the Blaru-bottom. The sum, six
tests/les_miserables.txt:66951:hundred and thirty thousand francs, all in bank-bills, was not very
tests/les_miserables.txt:66952:bulky, and was contained in a box; only, in order to preserve the box
tests/les_miserables.txt:66953:from dampness, he had placed it in a coffer filled with chestnut
tests/les_miserables.txt:66954:shavings. In the same coffer he had placed his other treasures, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:66955:Bishop’s candlesticks. It will be remembered that he had carried off
tests/les_miserables.txt:66956:the candlesticks when he made his escape from Montreuil-sur-Mer. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:66959:to get it in the Blaru-bottom. Hence the absences which we have
tests/les_miserables.txt:66960:mentioned. He had a pickaxe somewhere in the heather, in a hiding-place
tests/les_miserables.txt:66961:known to himself alone. When he beheld Marius convalescent, feeling
tests/les_miserables.txt:66962:that the hour was at hand, when that money might prove of service, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:66964:woods, but on this occasion, in the morning instead of in the evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66965:Boulatreulle inherited his pickaxe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66967:The actual sum was five hundred and eighty-four thousand, five hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:66968:francs. Jean Valjean withdrew the five hundred francs for himself.—“We
tests/les_miserables.txt:66971:The difference between that sum and the six hundred and thirty thousand
tests/les_miserables.txt:66972:francs withdrawn from Laffitte represented his expenditure in ten
tests/les_miserables.txt:66973:years, from 1823 to 1833. The five years of his stay in the convent had
tests/les_miserables.txt:66974:cost only five thousand francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:66976:Jean Valjean set the two candlesticks on the chimney-piece, where they
tests/les_miserables.txt:66980:story had been told in his presence, and he had verified the fact in
tests/les_miserables.txt:66981:the _Moniteur_, how a police inspector named Javert had been found
tests/les_miserables.txt:66984:otherwise irreproachable and highly esteemed by his superiors, pointed
tests/les_miserables.txt:66985:to a fit of mental aberration and a suicide.—“In fact,” thought Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:66986:Valjean, “since he left me at liberty, once having got me in his power,
tests/les_miserables.txt:66997:Everything was made ready for the wedding. The doctor, on being
tests/les_miserables.txt:66998:consulted, declared that it might take place in February. It was then
tests/les_miserables.txt:66999:December. A few ravishing weeks of perfect happiness passed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67004:“The wonderful, beautiful girl!” he exclaimed. “And she has so sweet
tests/les_miserables.txt:67005:and good an air! she is, without exception, the most charming girl that
tests/les_miserables.txt:67007:of violets. How graceful! one cannot live otherwise than nobly with
tests/les_miserables.txt:67008:such a creature. Marius, my boy, you are a Baron, you are rich, don’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:67012:Cosette and Marius had passed abruptly from the sepulchre to paradise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67018:“No,” replied Cosette, “but it seems to me that the good God is caring
tests/les_miserables.txt:67022:Jean Valjean did everything, smoothed away every difficulty, arranged
tests/les_miserables.txt:67024:happiness with as much ardor, and, apparently with as much joy, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:67027:As he had been a mayor, he understood how to solve that delicate
tests/les_miserables.txt:67028:problem, with the secret of which he alone was acquainted, Cosette’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:67029:civil status. If he were to announce her origin bluntly, it might
tests/les_miserables.txt:67030:prevent the marriage, who knows? He extricated Cosette from all
tests/les_miserables.txt:67031:difficulties. He concocted for her a family of dead people, a sure
tests/les_miserables.txt:67032:means of not encountering any objections. Cosette was the only scion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67033:an extinct family; Cosette was not his own daughter, but the daughter
tests/les_miserables.txt:67034:of the other Fauchelevent. Two brothers Fauchelevent had been gardeners
tests/les_miserables.txt:67035:to the convent of the Petit-Picpus. Inquiry was made at that convent;
tests/les_miserables.txt:67036:the very best information and the most respectable references abounded;
tests/les_miserables.txt:67037:the good nuns, not very apt and but little inclined to fathom questions
tests/les_miserables.txt:67038:of paternity, and not attaching any importance to the matter, had never
tests/les_miserables.txt:67039:understood exactly of which of the two Fauchelevents Cosette was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67041:_acte de notoriété_ was drawn up. Cosette became in the eyes of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67042:law, Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent. She was declared an orphan,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67044:was appointed, under the name of Fauchelevent, as Cosette’s guardian,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67047:As for the five hundred and eighty thousand francs, they constituted a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67048:legacy bequeathed to Cosette by a dead person, who desired to remain
tests/les_miserables.txt:67049:unknown. The original legacy had consisted of five hundred and
tests/les_miserables.txt:67050:ninety-four thousand francs; but ten thousand francs had been expended
tests/les_miserables.txt:67051:on the education of Mademoiselle Euphrasie, five thousand francs of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67052:that amount having been paid to the convent. This legacy, deposited in
tests/les_miserables.txt:67055:very acceptable, as the reader will perceive, especially when the sum
tests/les_miserables.txt:67056:due was half a million. There were some peculiarities here and there,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67057:it is true, but they were not noticed; one of the interested parties
tests/les_miserables.txt:67059:thousand francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67062:had so long called father. He was merely a kinsman; another
tests/les_miserables.txt:67063:Fauchelevent was her real father. At any other time this would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:67064:broken her heart. But at the ineffable moment which she was then
tests/les_miserables.txt:67065:passing through, it cast but a slight shadow, a faint cloud, and she
tests/les_miserables.txt:67066:was so full of joy that the cloud did not last long. She had Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67067:The young man arrived, the old man was effaced; such is life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67070:enigmas around her; every being who has had a mysterious childhood is
tests/les_miserables.txt:67071:always prepared for certain renunciations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67073:Nevertheless, she continued to call Jean Valjean: Father.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67075:Cosette, happy as the angels, was enthusiastic over Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:67077:compliments and presents. While Jean Valjean was building up for
tests/les_miserables.txt:67078:Cosette a normal situation in society and an unassailable status, M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67080:amused him as being magnificent. He had given to Cosette a robe of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67081:Binche guipure which had descended to him from his own grandmother.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67083:“These fashions come up again,” said he, “ancient things are the rage,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67085:childhood.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67088:He rifled his respectable chests of drawers in Coromandel lacquer, with
tests/les_miserables.txt:67089:swelling fronts, which had not been opened for years.—“Let us hear the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67090:confession of these dowagers,” he said, “let us see what they have in
tests/les_miserables.txt:67091:their paunches.” He noisily violated the pot-bellied drawers of all his
tests/les_miserables.txt:67094:kerchiefs embroidered in gold that could be washed, dauphines without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67095:right or wrong side, in the piece, Genoa and Alençon point lace,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67097:with microscopic battles, gewgaws and ribbons—he lavished everything on
tests/les_miserables.txt:67100:limit clothed in satin and velvet. Her wedding basket seemed to her to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67102:wings of Mechlin lace.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67104:The intoxication of the lovers was only equalled, as we have already
tests/les_miserables.txt:67105:said, by the ecstasy of the grandfather. A sort of flourish of trumpets
tests/les_miserables.txt:67108:Every morning, a fresh offering of bric-à-brac from the grandfather to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67109:Cosette. All possible knickknacks glittered around her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67112:bliss, said, apropos of I know not what incident:
tests/les_miserables.txt:67115:the ages, like Cato and like Phocion, and each one of them seems to me
tests/les_miserables.txt:67119:“Moire antique!” exclaimed the old gentleman. “Thanks, Marius. That is
tests/les_miserables.txt:67120:precisely the idea of which I was in search.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67123:And on the following day, a magnificent dress of tea-rose colored moire
tests/les_miserables.txt:67126:From these fripperies, the grandfather extracted a bit of wisdom.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67130:necessary. Season that enormously with the superfluous for me. A palace
tests/les_miserables.txt:67133:duchess. Fetch me Phyllis crowned with corn-flowers, and add a hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:67134:thousand francs income. Open for me a bucolic perspective as far as you
tests/les_miserables.txt:67135:can see, beneath a marble colonnade. I consent to the bucolic and also
tests/les_miserables.txt:67136:to the fairy spectacle of marble and gold. Dry happiness resembles dry
tests/les_miserables.txt:67138:useless, the extravagant, excess, that which serves no purpose. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:67139:remember to have seen, in the Cathedral of Strasburg, a clock, as tall
tests/les_miserables.txt:67140:as a three-story house which marked the hours, which had the kindness
tests/les_miserables.txt:67141:to indicate the hour, but which had not the air of being made for that;
tests/les_miserables.txt:67142:and which, after having struck midday, or midnight,—midday, the hour of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67145:fishes, Phœbus and Phœbe, and a host of things which emerged from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67146:niche, and the twelve apostles, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:67148:on the trumpet to boot. Without reckoning delicious chimes which it
tests/les_miserables.txt:67149:sprinkled through the air, on every occasion, without any one’s knowing
tests/les_miserables.txt:67150:why. Is a petty bald clock-face which merely tells the hour equal to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67151:that? For my part, I am of the opinion of the big clock of Strasburg,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67152:and I prefer it to the cuckoo clock from the Black Forest.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67155:M. Gillenormand talked nonsense in connection with the wedding, and all
tests/les_miserables.txt:67156:the fripperies of the eighteenth century passed pell-mell through his
tests/les_miserables.txt:67160:organize a day of enjoyment in this age,” he exclaimed. “Your
tests/les_miserables.txt:67161:nineteenth century is weak. It lacks excess. It ignores the rich, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:67162:ignores the noble. In everything it is clean-shaven. Your third estate
tests/les_miserables.txt:67163:is insipid, colorless, odorless, and shapeless. The dreams of your
tests/les_miserables.txt:67165:decorated, violet, ebony and calico. Make way! Make way! the Sieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:67166:Curmudgeon is marrying Mademoiselle Clutch-penny. Sumptuousness and
tests/les_miserables.txt:67167:splendor. A louis d’or has been stuck to a candle. There’s the epoch
tests/les_miserables.txt:67169:Ah! in 1787, I predict that all was lost, from the day when I beheld
tests/les_miserables.txt:67170:the Duc de Rohan, Prince de Léon, Duc de Chabot, Duc de Montbazon,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67171:Marquis de Soubise, Vicomte de Thouars, peer of France, go to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67172:Longchamps in a tapecu! That has borne its fruits. In this century, men
tests/les_miserables.txt:67174:stingy. People take care of their surfaces and varnish them; every one
tests/les_miserables.txt:67175:is dressed as though just out of a bandbox, washed, soaped, scraped,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67176:shaved, combed, waked, smoothed, rubbed, brushed, cleaned on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67177:outside, irreproachable, polished as a pebble, discreet, neat, and at
tests/les_miserables.txt:67178:the same time, death of my life, in the depths of their consciences
tests/les_miserables.txt:67179:they have dung-heaps and cesspools that are enough to make a cow-herd
tests/les_miserables.txt:67180:who blows his nose in his fingers, recoil. I grant to this age the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67181:device: ‘Dirty Cleanliness.’ Don’t be vexed, Marius, give me permission
tests/les_miserables.txt:67186:longer know how to marry. Ah! it is true, I regret the grace of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67187:ancient manners. I regret everything about them, their elegance, their
tests/les_miserables.txt:67188:chivalry, those courteous and delicate ways, that joyous luxury which
tests/les_miserables.txt:67189:every one possessed, music forming part of the wedding, a symphony
tests/les_miserables.txt:67190:above stairs, a beating of drums below stairs, the dances, the joyous
tests/les_miserables.txt:67191:faces round the table, the fine-spun gallant compliments, the songs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67193:of ribbon. I regret the bride’s garter. The bride’s garter is cousin to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67197:did Achilles and Hector hew each other up with vast blows of their
tests/les_miserables.txt:67198:lances? Because Helen allowed Paris to take her garter. With Cosette’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:67199:garter, Homer would construct the _Iliad_. He would put in his poem, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67200:loquacious old fellow, like me, and he would call him Nestor. My
tests/les_miserables.txt:67202:wisely; they had a good contract, and then they had a good carouse. As
tests/les_miserables.txt:67203:soon as Cujas had taken his departure, Gamacho entered. But, in sooth!
tests/les_miserables.txt:67204:the stomach is an agreeable beast which demands its due, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:67207:moderately concealed. Oh! the large laughing mouths, and how gay we
tests/les_miserables.txt:67209:a branch of lilacs or a tuft of roses; whether he was a shepherd or a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67210:warrior; and if, by chance, one was a captain of dragoons, one found
tests/les_miserables.txt:67211:means to call oneself Florian. People thought much of looking well.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67213:flower, a Marquis had the air of a precious stone. People had no straps
tests/les_miserables.txt:67214:to their boots, they had no boots. They were spruce, shining, waved,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67215:lustrous, fluttering, dainty, coquettish, which did not at all prevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:67217:claws. That was the day of the _Galland Indies_. One of the sides of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67218:that century was delicate, the other was magnificent; and by the green
tests/les_miserables.txt:67219:cabbages! people amused themselves. To-day, people are serious. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:67220:bourgeois is avaricious, the bourgeoise is a prude; your century is
tests/les_miserables.txt:67221:unfortunate. People would drive away the Graces as being too low in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67222:neck. Alas! beauty is concealed as though it were ugliness. Since the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67223:revolution, everything, including the ballet-dancers, has had its
tests/les_miserables.txt:67224:trousers; a mountebank dancer must be grave; your rigadoons are
tests/les_miserables.txt:67225:doctrinarian. It is necessary to be majestic. People would be greatly
tests/les_miserables.txt:67226:annoyed if they did not carry their chins in their cravats. The ideal
tests/les_miserables.txt:67227:of an urchin of twenty when he marries, is to resemble M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67230:in love gayly then, what the deuce! marry, when you marry, with fever
tests/les_miserables.txt:67232:church, well and good. But, as soon as the mass is finished, sarpejou!
tests/les_miserables.txt:67234:royal and chimerical; it should promenade its ceremony from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67235:cathedral of Rheims to the pagoda of Chanteloup. I have a horror of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67238:Laughter, argiraspides; they are stupids. My friends, every recently
tests/les_miserables.txt:67239:made bridegroom ought to be Prince Aldobrandini. Profit by that unique
tests/les_miserables.txt:67241:eagles, even if you do have to fall back on the morrow into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67242:bourgeoisie of the frogs. Don’t economize on the nuptials, do not prune
tests/les_miserables.txt:67243:them of their splendors; don’t scrimp on the day when you beam. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:67244:wedding is not the housekeeping. Oh! if I were to carry out my fancy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67247:rural divinities, I would convoke the Dryads and the Nereids. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:67248:nuptials of Amphitrite, a rosy cloud, nymphs with well dressed locks
tests/les_miserables.txt:67249:and entirely naked, an Academician offering quatrains to the goddess, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67250:chariot drawn by marine monsters.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67252:“Triton trottait devant, et tirait de sa conque
tests/les_miserables.txt:67253:Des sons si ravissants qu’il ravissait quiconque!”65
tests/les_miserables.txt:67257:nothing of such matters, deuce take it!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67260:While the grandfather, in full lyrical effusion, was listening to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67261:himself, Cosette and Marius grew intoxicated as they gazed freely at
tests/les_miserables.txt:67262:each other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67264:Aunt Gillenormand surveyed all this with her imperturbable placidity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67265:Within the last five or six months she had experienced a certain amount
tests/les_miserables.txt:67266:of emotions. Marius returned, Marius brought back bleeding, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:67267:brought back from a barricade, Marius dead, then living, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:67268:reconciled, Marius betrothed, Marius wedding a poor girl, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:67269:wedding a millionairess. The six hundred thousand francs had been her
tests/les_miserables.txt:67270:last surprise. Then, her indifference of a girl taking her first
tests/les_miserables.txt:67271:communion returned to her. She went regularly to service, told her
tests/les_miserables.txt:67272:beads, read her euchology, mumbled _Aves_ in one corner of the house,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67277:There is a certain state of inert asceticism in which the soul,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67278:neutralized by torpor, a stranger to that which may be designated as
tests/les_miserables.txt:67279:the business of living, receives no impressions, either human, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:67280:pleasant or painful, with the exception of earthquakes and
tests/les_miserables.txt:67281:catastrophes. This devotion, as Father Gillenormand said to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:67282:daughter, corresponds to a cold in the head. You smell nothing of life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67285:Moreover, the six hundred thousand francs had settled the elderly
tests/les_miserables.txt:67286:spinster’s indecision. Her father had acquired the habit of taking her
tests/les_miserables.txt:67287:so little into account, that he had not consulted her in the matter of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67288:consent to Marius’ marriage. He had acted impetuously, according to his
tests/les_miserables.txt:67290:Marius. As for the aunt,—it had not even occurred to him that the aunt
tests/les_miserables.txt:67291:existed, and that she could have an opinion of her own, and, sheep as
tests/les_miserables.txt:67294:the question of the marriage without reference to me; I shall settle
tests/les_miserables.txt:67295:the question of the inheritance without consulting him.” She was rich,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67296:in fact, and her father was not. She had reserved her decision on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:67297:point. It is probable that, had the match been a poor one, she would
tests/les_miserables.txt:67298:have left him poor. “So much the worse for my nephew! he is wedding a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67301:of lovers were concerned. One owes some consideration to six hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:67302:thousand francs, and it was evident that she could not do otherwise
tests/les_miserables.txt:67303:than leave her fortune to these young people, since they did not need
tests/les_miserables.txt:67306:It was arranged that the couple should live with the grandfather—M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67307:Gillenormand insisted on resigning to them his chamber, the finest in
tests/les_miserables.txt:67310:chamber.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67313:He furnished this chamber with a multitude of elegant trifles. He had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67314:the ceiling and walls hung with an extraordinary stuff, which he had by
tests/les_miserables.txt:67315:him in the piece, and which he believed to have emanated from Utrecht
tests/les_miserables.txt:67316:with a buttercup-colored satin ground, covered with velvet auricula
tests/les_miserables.txt:67318:Duchesse d’Anville at la Roche-Guyon was draped.”—On the chimney-piece,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67319:he set a little figure in Saxe porcelain, carrying a muff against her
tests/les_miserables.txt:67320:nude stomach.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67322:M. Gillenormand’s library became the lawyer’s study, which Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:67323:needed; a study, it will be remembered, being required by the council
tests/les_miserables.txt:67332:The lovers saw each other every day. Cosette came with M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67333:Fauchelevent.—“This is reversing things,” said Mademoiselle
tests/les_miserables.txt:67334:Gillenormand, “to have the bride come to the house to do the courting
tests/les_miserables.txt:67335:like this.” But Marius’ convalescence had caused the habit to become
tests/les_miserables.txt:67336:established, and the armchairs of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67337:better adapted to interviews than the straw chairs of the Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:67338:l’Homme Armé, had rooted it. Marius and M. Fauchelevent saw each other,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67339:but did not address each other. It seemed as though this had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:67340:agreed upon. Every girl needs a chaperon. Cosette could not have come
tests/les_miserables.txt:67341:without M. Fauchelevent. In Marius’ eyes, M. Fauchelevent was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67342:condition attached to Cosette. He accepted it. By dint of discussing
tests/les_miserables.txt:67343:political matters, vaguely and without precision, from the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67344:view of the general amelioration of the fate of all men, they came to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67345:say a little more than “yes” and “no.” Once, on the subject of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67346:education, which Marius wished to have free and obligatory, multiplied
tests/les_miserables.txt:67349:they almost conversed. M. Fauchelevent talked well, and even with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67350:certain loftiness of language—still he lacked something indescribable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67351:M. Fauchelevent possessed something less and also something more, than
tests/les_miserables.txt:67355:sorts of mute questions this M. Fauchelevent, who was to him simply
tests/les_miserables.txt:67356:benevolent and cold. There were moments when doubts as to his own
tests/les_miserables.txt:67357:recollections occurred to him. There was a void in his memory, a black
tests/les_miserables.txt:67358:spot, an abyss excavated by four months of agony.—Many things had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:67359:lost therein. He had come to the point of asking himself whether it
tests/les_miserables.txt:67360:were really a fact that he had seen M. Fauchelevent, so serious and so
tests/les_miserables.txt:67361:calm a man, in the barricade.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67363:This was not, however, the only stupor which the apparitions and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67364:disappearances of the past had left in his mind. It must not be
tests/les_miserables.txt:67366:which force us, even when happy, even when satisfied, to glance sadly
tests/les_miserables.txt:67367:behind us. The head which does not turn backwards towards horizons that
tests/les_miserables.txt:67368:have vanished contains neither thought nor love. At times, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:67369:clasped his face between his hands, and the vague and tumultuous past
tests/les_miserables.txt:67370:traversed the twilight which reigned in his brain. Again he beheld
tests/les_miserables.txt:67371:Mabeuf fall, he heard Gavroche singing amid the grape-shot, he felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:67372:beneath his lips the cold brow of Éponine; Enjolras, Courfeyrac, Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:67373:Prouvaire, Combeferre, Bossuet, Grantaire, all his friends rose erect
tests/les_miserables.txt:67375:sorrowful, valiant, charming or tragic beings merely dreams? had they
tests/les_miserables.txt:67376:actually existed? The revolt had enveloped everything in its smoke.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67377:These great fevers create great dreams. He questioned himself; he felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:67380:shadows had carried off all except himself. It all seemed to him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67381:have disappeared as though behind the curtain of a theatre. There are
tests/les_miserables.txt:67382:curtains like this which drop in life. God passes on to the following
tests/les_miserables.txt:67383:act.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67385:And he himself—was he actually the same man? He, the poor man, was
tests/les_miserables.txt:67386:rich; he, the abandoned, had a family; he, the despairing, was to marry
tests/les_miserables.txt:67388:entered into it black and had emerged from it white, and in that tomb
tests/les_miserables.txt:67389:the others had remained. At certain moments, all these beings of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67390:past, returned and present, formed a circle around him, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:67391:overshadowed him; then he thought of Cosette, and recovered his
tests/les_miserables.txt:67392:serenity; but nothing less than this felicity could have sufficed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67393:efface that catastrophe.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67395:M. Fauchelevent almost occupied a place among these vanished beings.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67396:Marius hesitated to believe that the Fauchelevent of the barricade was
tests/les_miserables.txt:67397:the same as this Fauchelevent in flesh and blood, sitting so gravely
tests/les_miserables.txt:67399:occasioned and brought back by his hours of delirium. However, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67401:Fauchelevent was possible. Such an idea had not even occurred to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67402:We have already indicated this characteristic detail.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67404:Two men who have a secret in common, and who, by a sort of tacit
tests/les_miserables.txt:67405:agreement, exchange not a word on the subject, are less rare than is
tests/les_miserables.txt:67406:commonly supposed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67408:Once only, did Marius make the attempt. He introduced into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67409:conversation the Rue de la Chanvrerie, and, turning to M. Fauchelevent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67412:“Of course, you are acquainted with that street?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67421:“I have no idea of the name of that street,” replied M. Fauchelevent,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67424:The response which bore upon the name of the street and not upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67425:street itself, appeared to Marius to be more conclusive than it really
tests/les_miserables.txt:67428:“Decidedly,” thought he, “I have been dreaming. I have been subject to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67429:a hallucination. It was some one who resembled him. M. Fauchelevent was
tests/les_miserables.txt:67438:Marius’ enchantment, great as it was, could not efface from his mind
tests/les_miserables.txt:67439:other pre-occupations.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67442:upon, he caused difficult and scrupulous retrospective researches to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:67446:account, he owed it on his own.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67449:Marius, back to M. Gillenormand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67453:gratitude not discharged, they would leave a shadow on his life, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:67458:obtain a quittance from the past.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67460:That Thénardier was a villain detracted nothing from the fact that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:67461:had saved Colonel Pontmercy. Thénardier was a ruffian in the eyes of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67462:all the world except Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67464:And Marius, ignorant of the real scene in the battle field of Waterloo,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67465:was not aware of the peculiar detail, that his father, so far as
tests/les_miserables.txt:67466:Thénardier was concerned was in the strange position of being indebted
tests/les_miserables.txt:67470:None of the various agents whom Marius employed succeeded in
tests/les_miserables.txt:67471:discovering any trace of Thénardier. Obliteration appeared to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:67472:complete in that quarter. Madame Thénardier had died in prison pending
tests/les_miserables.txt:67474:of that lamentable group, had plunged back into the gloom. The gulf of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67475:the social unknown had silently closed above those beings. On the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67476:surface there was not visible so much as that quiver, that trembling,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67477:those obscure concentric circles which announce that something has
tests/les_miserables.txt:67481:case, Claquesous having disappeared, the principal persons accused
tests/les_miserables.txt:67482:having escaped from prison, the trial connected with the ambush in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67483:Gorbeau house had come to nothing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67485:That affair had remained rather obscure. The bench of Assizes had been
tests/les_miserables.txt:67486:obliged to content themselves with two subordinates. Panchaud, alias
tests/les_miserables.txt:67488:who had been inconsistently condemned, after a hearing of both sides of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67489:the case, to ten years in the galleys. Hard labor for life had been the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67490:sentence pronounced against the escaped and contumacious accomplices.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67492:Thénardier, the head and leader, had been, through contumacy, likewise
tests/les_miserables.txt:67493:condemned to death.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67495:This sentence was the only information remaining about Thénardier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67496:casting upon that buried name its sinister light like a candle beside a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67499:Moreover, by thrusting Thénardier back into the very remotest depths,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67500:through a fear of being re-captured, this sentence added to the density
tests/les_miserables.txt:67501:of the shadows which enveloped this man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67504:the researches were at first to some extent successful, then came to an
tests/les_miserables.txt:67505:abrupt conclusion. They succeeded in finding the carriage which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67509:The coachman declared that, on the 6th of June, in obedience to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67510:commands of a police-agent, he had stood from three o’clock in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67512:outlet of the Grand Sewer; that, towards nine o’clock in the evening,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67513:the grating of the sewer, which abuts on the bank of the river, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67516:watch at that point, had arrested the living man and had seized the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67517:dead man; that, at the order of the police-agent, he, the coachman, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67518:taken “all those folks” into his carriage; that they had first driven
tests/les_miserables.txt:67521:coachman, recognized him perfectly, although he was alive “this time”;
tests/les_miserables.txt:67522:that afterwards, they had entered the vehicle again, that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67523:whipped up his horses; a few paces from the gate of the Archives, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:67524:had called to him to halt; that there, in the street, they had paid him
tests/les_miserables.txt:67525:and left him, and that the police-agent had led the other man away;
tests/les_miserables.txt:67528:Marius, as we have said, recalled nothing. He only remembered that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:67529:had been seized from behind by an energetic hand at the moment when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:67530:was falling backwards into the barricade; then, everything vanished so
tests/les_miserables.txt:67531:far as he was concerned.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67533:He had only regained consciousness at M. Gillenormand’s.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67535:He was lost in conjectures.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67537:He could not doubt his own identity. Still, how had it come to pass
tests/les_miserables.txt:67538:that, having fallen in the Rue de la Chanvrerie, he had been picked up
tests/les_miserables.txt:67539:by the police-agent on the banks of the Seine, near the Pont des
tests/les_miserables.txt:67542:Some one had carried him from the Quartier des Halles to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67547:This was the man for whom Marius was searching.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67549:Of this man, who was his savior, nothing; not a trace; not the faintest
tests/les_miserables.txt:67550:indication.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67552:Marius, although forced to preserve great reserve, in that direction,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67553:pushed his inquiries as far as the prefecture of police. There, no more
tests/les_miserables.txt:67556:The prefecture knew less about the matter than did the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67557:hackney-coachman. They had no knowledge of any arrest having been made
tests/les_miserables.txt:67560:No report of any agent had been received there upon this matter, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:67561:was regarded at the prefecture as a fable. The invention of this fable
tests/les_miserables.txt:67562:was attributed to the coachman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67564:A coachman who wants a gratuity is capable of anything, even of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67565:imagination. The fact was assured, nevertheless, and Marius could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:67568:Everything about this singular enigma was inexplicable.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67570:What had become of that man, that mysterious man, whom the coachman had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67571:seen emerge from the grating of the Grand Sewer bearing upon his back
tests/les_miserables.txt:67572:the unconscious Marius, and whom the police-agent on the watch had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67573:arrested in the very act of rescuing an insurgent? What had become of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67576:Why had this agent preserved silence? Had the man succeeded in making
tests/les_miserables.txt:67577:his escape? Had he bribed the agent? Why did this man give no sign of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67580:again? Perhaps he was above compensation, but no one is above
tests/les_miserables.txt:67581:gratitude. Was he dead? Who was the man? What sort of a face had he? No
tests/les_miserables.txt:67582:one could tell him this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67584:The coachman answered: “The night was very dark.” Basque and Nicolette,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67585:all in a flutter, had looked only at their young master all covered
tests/les_miserables.txt:67588:The porter, whose candle had lighted the tragic arrival of Marius, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67590:description that he gave:
tests/les_miserables.txt:67595:Marius had the blood-stained clothing which he had worn when he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67596:been brought back to his grandfather preserved, in the hope that it
tests/les_miserables.txt:67597:would prove of service in his researches.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67599:On examining the coat, it was found that one skirt had been torn in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67600:singular way. A piece was missing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67602:One evening, Marius was speaking in the presence of Cosette and Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:67604:inquiries which he had made, and of the fruitlessness of his efforts.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67605:The cold countenance of “Monsieur Fauchelevent” angered him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67607:He exclaimed, with a vivacity which had something of wrath in it:
tests/les_miserables.txt:67610:he did, sir? He intervened like an archangel. He must have flung
tests/les_miserables.txt:67612:the sewer, have dragged me into it and have carried me through it! He
tests/les_miserables.txt:67615:cesspool,—more than a league and a half, sir, with a corpse upon his
tests/les_miserables.txt:67616:back! And with what object? With the sole object of saving the corpse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67617:And that corpse I was. He said to himself: ‘There may still be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67618:glimpse of life there, perchance; I will risk my own existence for that
tests/les_miserables.txt:67619:miserable spark!’ And his existence he risked not once but twenty
tests/les_miserables.txt:67622:man did all this? And he had no recompense to expect. What was I? An
tests/les_miserables.txt:67623:insurgent. What was I? One of the conquered. Oh! if Cosette’s six
tests/les_miserables.txt:67624:hundred thousand francs were mine….”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67629:“Well,” resumed Marius, “I would give them all to find that man once
tests/les_miserables.txt:67653:spectacle, with a confusion of cherubim and Cupids over the heads of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67654:the bridal pair, a marriage worthy to form the subject of a painting to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67655:be placed over a door; but it had been sweet and smiling.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67657:The manner of marriage in 1833 was not the same as it is to-day. France
tests/les_miserables.txt:67658:had not yet borrowed from England that supreme delicacy of carrying off
tests/les_miserables.txt:67659:one’s wife, of fleeing, on coming out of church, of hiding oneself with
tests/les_miserables.txt:67660:shame from one’s happiness, and of combining the ways of a bankrupt
tests/les_miserables.txt:67662:the full the chastity, exquisiteness, and decency of jolting their
tests/les_miserables.txt:67663:paradise in a posting-chaise, of breaking up their mystery with
tests/les_miserables.txt:67664:clic-clacs, of taking for a nuptial bed the bed of an inn, and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67665:leaving behind them, in a commonplace chamber, at so much a night, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67666:most sacred of the souvenirs of life mingled pell-mell with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67667:tête-à-tête of the conductor of the diligence and the maid-servant of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67670:In this second half of the nineteenth century in which we are now
tests/les_miserables.txt:67671:living, the mayor and his scarf, the priest and his chasuble, the law
tests/les_miserables.txt:67672:and God no longer suffice; they must be eked out by the Postilion de
tests/les_miserables.txt:67673:Lonjumeau; a blue waistcoat turned up with red, and with bell buttons,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67674:a plaque like a vantbrace, knee-breeches of green leather, oaths to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67676:hat, long powdered locks, an enormous whip and tall boots. France does
tests/les_miserables.txt:67677:not yet carry elegance to the length of doing like the English
tests/les_miserables.txt:67678:nobility, and raining down on the post-chaise of the bridal pair a hail
tests/les_miserables.txt:67680:of Churchill, afterwards Marlborough, or Malbrouck, who was assailed on
tests/les_miserables.txt:67681:his wedding-day by the wrath of an aunt which brought him good luck.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67683:celebrations; but patience, as good taste continues to spread, we shall
tests/les_miserables.txt:67684:come to that.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67686:In 1833, a hundred years ago, marriage was not conducted at a full
tests/les_miserables.txt:67689:Strange to say, at that epoch, people still imagined that a wedding was
tests/les_miserables.txt:67690:a private and social festival, that a patriarchal banquet does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:67691:spoil a domestic solemnity, that gayety, even in excess, provided it be
tests/les_miserables.txt:67692:honest, and decent, does happiness no harm, and that, in short, it is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67694:whence a family is destined to spring, should begin at home, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:67695:the household should thenceforth have its nuptial chamber as its
tests/les_miserables.txt:67700:The marriage took place, therefore, in accordance with this now
tests/les_miserables.txt:67703:Natural and commonplace as this matter of marrying is, the banns to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67704:publish, the papers to be drawn up, the mayoralty, and the church
tests/les_miserables.txt:67705:produce some complication. They could not get ready before the 16th of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67708:Now, we note this detail, for the pure satisfaction of being exact, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:67709:chanced that the 16th fell on Shrove Tuesday. Hesitations, scruples,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67710:particularly on the part of Aunt Gillenormand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67712:“Shrove Tuesday!” exclaimed the grandfather, “so much the better. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:67719:Let us proceed. Here goes for the 16th! Do you want to delay, Marius?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67722:“No, certainly not!” replied the lover.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67724:“Let us marry, then,” cried the grandfather.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67726:Accordingly, the marriage took place on the 16th, notwithstanding the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67727:public merrymaking. It rained that day, but there is always in the sky
tests/les_miserables.txt:67728:a tiny scrap of blue at the service of happiness, which lovers see,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67729:even when the rest of creation is under an umbrella.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67731:On the preceding evening, Jean Valjean handed to Marius, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67732:presence of M. Gillenormand, the five hundred and eighty-four thousand
tests/les_miserables.txt:67733:francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67735:As the marriage was taking place under the régime of community of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67738:Henceforth, Toussaint was of no use to Jean Valjean; Cosette inherited
tests/les_miserables.txt:67741:As for Jean Valjean, a beautiful chamber in the Gillenormand house had
tests/les_miserables.txt:67742:been furnished expressly for him, and Cosette had said to him in such
tests/les_miserables.txt:67744:persuaded him to promise that he would come and occupy it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67746:A few days before that fixed on for the marriage, an accident happened
tests/les_miserables.txt:67747:to Jean Valjean; he crushed the thumb of his right hand. This was not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67750:Nevertheless, this had forced him to swathe his hand in a linen
tests/les_miserables.txt:67751:bandage, and to carry his arm in a sling, and had prevented his
tests/les_miserables.txt:67752:signing. M. Gillenormand, in his capacity of Cosette’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:67753:supervising-guardian, had supplied his place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67755:We will not conduct the reader either to the mayor’s office or to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67756:church. One does not follow a pair of lovers to that extent, and one is
tests/les_miserables.txt:67757:accustomed to turn one’s back on the drama as soon as it puts a wedding
tests/les_miserables.txt:67758:nosegay in its buttonhole. We will confine ourselves to noting an
tests/les_miserables.txt:67759:incident which, though unnoticed by the wedding party, marked the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67760:transit from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire to the church of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67763:At that epoch, the northern extremity of the Rue Saint-Louis was in
tests/les_miserables.txt:67764:process of repaving. It was barred off, beginning with the Rue du
tests/les_miserables.txt:67765:Parc-Royal. It was impossible for the wedding carriages to go directly
tests/les_miserables.txt:67766:to Saint-Paul. They were obliged to alter their course, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67769:jam of vehicles.—“Why?” asked M. Gillenormand—“Because of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67776:They went by way of the boulevard. The first wedding coach held Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:67778:separated from his betrothed according to usage, did not come until the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67779:second. The nuptial train, on emerging from the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:67780:Filles-du-Calvaire, became entangled in a long procession of vehicles
tests/les_miserables.txt:67781:which formed an endless chain from the Madeleine to the Bastille, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:67783:In spite of the fact that it was raining at intervals, Merry-Andrew,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67785:1833, Paris had disguised itself as Venice. Such Shrove Tuesdays are no
tests/les_miserables.txt:67786:longer to be seen nowadays. Everything which exists being a scattered
tests/les_miserables.txt:67790:curious spectators. The terraces which crown the peristyles of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67791:theatres were bordered with spectators. Besides the maskers, they
tests/les_miserables.txt:67792:stared at that procession—peculiar to Shrove Tuesday as to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67793:Longchamps,—of vehicles of every description, citadines, tapissières,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67794:carioles, cabriolets marching in order, rigorously riveted to each
tests/les_miserables.txt:67795:other by the police regulations, and locked into rails, as it were. Any
tests/les_miserables.txt:67796:one in these vehicles is at once a spectator and a spectacle. Police
tests/les_miserables.txt:67798:interminable parallel files, moving in contrary directions, and saw to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67799:it that nothing interfered with that double current, those two brooks
tests/les_miserables.txt:67800:of carriages, flowing, the one downstream, the other upstream, the one
tests/les_miserables.txt:67802:Saint-Antoine. The carriages of the peers of France and of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67803:Ambassadors, emblazoned with coats of arms, held the middle of the way,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67804:going and coming freely. Certain joyous and magnificent trains, notably
tests/les_miserables.txt:67806:England cracked her whip; Lord Seymour’s post-chaise, harassed by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67807:nickname from the populace, passed with great noise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67809:In the double file, along which the municipal guards galloped like
tests/les_miserables.txt:67810:sheep-dogs, honest family coaches, loaded down with great-aunts and
tests/les_miserables.txt:67811:grandmothers, displayed at their doors fresh groups of children in
tests/les_miserables.txt:67813:little creatures, who felt that they formed an official part of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67814:public mirth, who were imbued with the dignity of their harlequinade,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67815:and who possessed the gravity of functionaries.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67817:From time to time, a hitch arose somewhere in the procession of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67818:vehicles; one or other of the two lateral files halted until the knot
tests/les_miserables.txt:67819:was disentangled; one carriage delayed sufficed to paralyze the whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:67820:line. Then they set out again on the march.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67822:The wedding carriages were in the file proceeding towards the Bastille,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67825:other file, which was proceeding towards the Madeleine, halted also. At
tests/les_miserables.txt:67826:that point of the file there was a carriage-load of maskers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67828:These carriages, or to speak more correctly, these wagon-loads of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67832:is about to undergo a change.” A pile of Cassandras, Harlequins and
tests/les_miserables.txt:67834:grotesquenesses, from the Turk to the savage, Hercules supporting
tests/les_miserables.txt:67837:dandified hats, spectacles of a grimacer, three-cornered hats of Janot
tests/les_miserables.txt:67838:tormented with a butterfly, shouts directed at pedestrians, fists on
tests/les_miserables.txt:67839:hips, bold attitudes, bare shoulders, immodesty unchained; a chaos of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67840:shamelessness driven by a coachman crowned with flowers; this is what
tests/les_miserables.txt:67843:Greece stood in need of the chariot of Thespis, France stands in need
tests/les_miserables.txt:67844:of the hackney-coach of Vadé.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67846:Everything can be parodied, even parody. The Saturnalia, that grimace
tests/les_miserables.txt:67848:Shrove Tuesday; and the Bacchanal, formerly crowned with sprays of vine
tests/les_miserables.txt:67851:shape under the soaked rags of the North, has finally come to be called
tests/les_miserables.txt:67852:the Jack-pudding.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67854:The tradition of carriage-loads of maskers runs back to the most
tests/les_miserables.txt:67855:ancient days of the monarchy. The accounts of Louis XI. allot to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67856:bailiff of the palace “twenty sous, Tournois, for three coaches of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67857:mascarades in the crossroads.” In our day, these noisy heaps of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67858:creatures are accustomed to have themselves driven in some ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:67859:cuckoo carriage, whose imperial they load down, or they overwhelm a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67860:hired landau, with its top thrown back, with their tumultuous groups.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67861:Twenty of them ride in a carriage intended for six. They cling to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67862:seats, to the rumble, on the cheeks of the hood, on the shafts. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:67863:even bestride the carriage lamps. They stand, sit, lie, with their
tests/les_miserables.txt:67866:visible. These carriage-loads form mountains of mirth in the midst of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67867:the rout. Collé, Panard and Piron flow from it, enriched with slang.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67868:This carriage which has become colossal through its freight, has an air
tests/les_miserables.txt:67869:of conquest. Uproar reigns in front, tumult behind. People vociferate,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67871:roars; sarcasm flames forth, joviality is flaunted like a red flag; two
tests/les_miserables.txt:67872:jades there drag farce blossomed forth into an apotheosis; it is the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67873:triumphal car of laughter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67875:A laughter that is too cynical to be frank. In truth, this laughter is
tests/les_miserables.txt:67876:suspicious. This laughter has a mission. It is charged with proving the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67879:These fishwife vehicles, in which one feels one knows not what shadows,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67881:lays one’s finger on a mysterious affinity between public men and
tests/les_miserables.txt:67882:public women.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67884:It certainly is sad that turpitude heaped up should give a sum total of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67886:enticed, that the system of spying, and serving as caryatids to
tests/les_miserables.txt:67887:prostitution should amuse the rabble when it confronts them, that the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67888:crowd loves to behold that monstrous living pile of tinsel rags, half
tests/les_miserables.txt:67890:they should clap their hands at this glory composed of all shames, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:67891:there would be no festival for the populace, did not the police
tests/les_miserables.txt:67893:But what can be done about it? These be-ribboned and be-flowered
tests/les_miserables.txt:67895:public. The laughter of all is the accomplice of universal degradation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67896:Certain unhealthy festivals disaggregate the people and convert them
tests/les_miserables.txt:67897:into the populace. And populaces, like tyrants, require buffoons. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:67898:King has Roquelaure, the populace has the Merry-Andrew. Paris is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67899:great, mad city on every occasion that it is a great sublime city.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67900:There the Carnival forms part of politics. Paris,—let us confess
tests/les_miserables.txt:67901:it—willingly allows infamy to furnish it with comedy. She only demands
tests/les_miserables.txt:67903:was of the same mind. She loved Nero. Nero was a titanic lighterman.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67905:Chance ordained, as we have just said, that one of these shapeless
tests/les_miserables.txt:67906:clusters of masked men and women, dragged about on a vast calash,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67908:halted on the right. The carriage-load of masks caught sight of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67909:wedding carriage containing the bridal party opposite them on the other
tests/les_miserables.txt:67915:“A sham wedding,” retorted another. “We are the genuine article.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67918:And, being too far off to accost the wedding party, and fearing also,
tests/les_miserables.txt:67919:the rebuke of the police, the two maskers turned their eyes elsewhere.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67921:At the end of another minute, the carriage-load of maskers had their
tests/les_miserables.txt:67922:hands full, the multitude set to yelling, which is the crowd’s caress
tests/les_miserables.txt:67923:to masquerades; and the two maskers who had just spoken had to face the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67924:throng with their comrades, and did not find the entire repertory of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67925:projectiles of the fishmarkets too extensive to retort to the enormous
tests/les_miserables.txt:67926:verbal attacks of the populace. A frightful exchange of metaphors took
tests/les_miserables.txt:67927:place between the maskers and the crowd.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67929:In the meanwhile, two other maskers in the same carriage, a Spaniard
tests/les_miserables.txt:67930:with an enormous nose, an elderly air, and huge black moustache, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67932:also noticed the wedding, and while their companions and the passers-by
tests/les_miserables.txt:67933:were exchanging insults, they had held a dialogue in a low voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67935:Their aside was covered by the tumult and was lost in it. The gusts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:67936:rain had drenched the front of the vehicle, which was wide open; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:67937:breezes of February are not warm; as the fishwife, clad in a low-necked
tests/les_miserables.txt:67938:gown, replied to the Spaniard, she shivered, laughed and coughed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:67948:“Do you see that old cove?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67951:“What old cove?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67954:“Yonder, in the first wedding-cart, on our side.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67957:“The one with his arm hung up in a black cravat?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:67972:“I’m willing that they should cut my throat, and I’m ready to swear
tests/les_miserables.txt:68000:“I can’t.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68003:“Never mind, that old cove who has something the matter with his paw I
tests/les_miserables.txt:68010:“No one can tell. Sometimes it does!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68013:“I don’t care a hang for old fellows, that I don’t!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68022:“How the devil does he come to be one of the wedding party?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68028:“Where does that wedding come from?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68056:“I can’t quit the vehicle.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68068:“I owe my fishwife day to the prefecture.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68074:“If I leave the cart, the first inspector who gets his eye on me will
tests/les_miserables.txt:68090:“He’s in the first carriage.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68105:“What concern is that of mine?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68120:“I can’t go out otherwise than masked. Here I’m concealed, no one knows
tests/les_miserables.txt:68122:Wednesday. I run the risk of being nabbed. I must sneak back into my
tests/les_miserables.txt:68126:“Not particularly.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68153:“In the first place, it’s not in that direction.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68166:me what that wedding is, who that old cove belongs to, and where that
tests/les_miserables.txt:68179:opposite directions, and the carriage of the maskers lost sight of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68188:To realize one’s dream. To whom is this accorded? There must be
tests/les_miserables.txt:68189:elections for this in heaven; we are all candidates, unknown to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68190:ourselves; the angels vote. Cosette and Marius had been elected.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68192:Cosette, both at the mayor’s office and at church, was dazzling and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68193:touching. Toussaint, assisted by Nicolette, had dressed her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68195:Cosette wore over a petticoat of white taffeta, her robe of Binche
tests/les_miserables.txt:68196:guipure, a veil of English point, a necklace of fine pearls, a wreath
tests/les_miserables.txt:68198:whiteness she beamed forth. It was an exquisite candor expanding and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68199:becoming transfigured in the light. One would have pronounced her a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68203:beneath the thick curls, pale lines—the scars of the barricade—were
tests/les_miserables.txt:68207:ever in his toilet and his manners all the elegances of the epoch of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68208:Barras, escorted Cosette. He took the place of Jean Valjean, who, on
tests/les_miserables.txt:68209:account of his arm being still in a sling, could not give his hand to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68212:Jean Valjean, dressed in black, followed them with a smile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68214:“Monsieur Fauchelevent,” said the grandfather to him, “this is a fine
tests/les_miserables.txt:68215:day. I vote for the end of afflictions and sorrows. Henceforth, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:68216:must be no sadness anywhere. Pardieu, I decree joy! Evil has no right
tests/les_miserables.txt:68217:to exist. That there should be any unhappy men is, in sooth, a disgrace
tests/les_miserables.txt:68218:to the azure of the sky. Evil does not come from man, who is good at
tests/les_miserables.txt:68219:bottom. All human miseries have for their capital and central
tests/les_miserables.txt:68221:I am uttering demagogical words! As far as I am concerned, I have no
tests/les_miserables.txt:68222:longer any political opinions; let all men be rich, that is to say,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68223:mirthful, and I confine myself to that.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68226:When, at the conclusion of all the ceremonies, after having pronounced
tests/les_miserables.txt:68228:having signed the registers at the municipality and at the sacristy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68229:after having exchanged their rings, after having knelt side by side
tests/les_miserables.txt:68230:under the pall of white moire in the smoke of the censer, they arrived,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68231:hand in hand, admired and envied by all, Marius in black, she in white,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68232:preceded by the suisse, with the epaulets of a colonel, tapping the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68233:pavement with his halberd, between two rows of astonished spectators,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68234:at the portals of the church, both leaves of which were thrown wide
tests/les_miserables.txt:68235:open, ready to enter their carriage again, and all being finished,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68236:Cosette still could not believe that it was real. She looked at Marius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68237:she looked at the crowd, she looked at the sky: it seemed as though she
tests/les_miserables.txt:68239:air added something indescribably enchanting to her beauty. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:68240:entered the same carriage to return home, Marius beside Cosette; M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68242:withdrawn one degree, and was in the second vehicle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68244:“My children,” said the grandfather, “here you are, Monsieur le Baron
tests/les_miserables.txt:68245:and Madame la Baronne, with an income of thirty thousand livres.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68248:And Cosette, nestling close to Marius, caressed his ear with an angelic
tests/les_miserables.txt:68252:These two creatures were resplendent. They had reached that irrevocable
tests/les_miserables.txt:68253:and irrecoverable moment, at the dazzling intersection of all youth and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68256:children were two lilies. They did not see each other, they did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:68257:contemplate each other. Cosette perceived Marius in the midst of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68258:glory; Marius perceived Cosette on an altar. And on that altar, and in
tests/les_miserables.txt:68259:that glory, the two apotheoses mingling, in the background, one knows
tests/les_miserables.txt:68260:not how, behind a cloud for Cosette, in a flash for Marius, there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68262:the nuptial pillow. All the torments through which they had passed came
tests/les_miserables.txt:68263:back to them in intoxication. It seemed to them that their sorrows,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68265:their despair, converted into caresses and rays of light, rendered
tests/les_miserables.txt:68266:still more charming the charming hour which was approaching; and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:68270:terminating in an ascension.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68272:It was the same enchantment in two souls, tinged with voluptuousness in
tests/les_miserables.txt:68273:Marius, and with modesty in Cosette. They said to each other in low
tests/les_miserables.txt:68274:tones: “We will go back to take a look at our little garden in the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:68275:Plumet.” The folds of Cosette’s gown lay across Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68277:Such a day is an ineffable mixture of dream and of reality. One
tests/les_miserables.txt:68280:is indescribable. The delights of these two hearts overflowed upon the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68281:crowd, and inspired the passers-by with cheerfulness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68284:through the windows of the carriage at the orange-flowers quivering on
tests/les_miserables.txt:68288:triumphant and radiant, mounted side by side with Cosette the staircase
tests/les_miserables.txt:68289:up which he had been borne in a dying condition. The poor, who had
tests/les_miserables.txt:68292:church; after the incense, roses. They thought they heard voices
tests/les_miserables.txt:68293:carolling in the infinite; they had God in their hearts; destiny
tests/les_miserables.txt:68294:appeared to them like a ceiling of stars; above their heads they beheld
tests/les_miserables.txt:68295:the light of a rising sun. All at once, the clock struck. Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:68296:glanced at Cosette’s charming bare arm, and at the rosy things which
tests/les_miserables.txt:68297:were vaguely visible through the lace of her bodice, and Cosette,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68298:intercepting Marius’ glance, blushed to her very hair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68301:been invited; they pressed about Cosette. Each one vied with the rest
tests/les_miserables.txt:68304:The officer, Théodule Gillenormand, now a captain, had come from
tests/les_miserables.txt:68306:wedding of his cousin Pontmercy. Cosette did not recognize him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68308:He, on his side, habituated as he was to have women consider him
tests/les_miserables.txt:68309:handsome, retained no more recollection of Cosette than of any other
tests/les_miserables.txt:68312:“How right I was not to believe in that story about the lancer!” said
tests/les_miserables.txt:68316:with Father Gillenormand; while he erected joy into aphorisms and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68320:She regained, for the purpose of addressing Jean Valjean, inflections
tests/les_miserables.txt:68321:of voice belonging to the time when she was a little girl. She caressed
tests/les_miserables.txt:68326:Illumination as brilliant as the daylight is the necessary seasoning of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68327:a great joy. Mist and obscurity are not accepted by the happy. They do
tests/les_miserables.txt:68328:not consent to be black. The night, yes; the shadows, no. If there is
tests/les_miserables.txt:68331:The dining-room was full of gay things. In the centre, above the white
tests/les_miserables.txt:68333:sorts of colored birds, blue, violet, red, and green, perched amid the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68334:candles; around the chandelier, girandoles, on the walls, sconces with
tests/les_miserables.txt:68335:triple and quintuple branches; mirrors, silverware, glassware, plate,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68336:porcelain, faïence, pottery, gold and silversmith’s work, all was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68337:sparkling and gay. The empty spaces between the candelabra were filled
tests/les_miserables.txt:68341:In the antechamber, three violins and a flute softly played quartettes
tests/les_miserables.txt:68344:Jean Valjean had seated himself on a chair in the drawing-room, behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:68345:the door, the leaf of which folded back upon him in such a manner as to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68346:nearly conceal him. A few moments before they sat down to table,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68347:Cosette came, as though inspired by a sudden whim, and made him a deep
tests/les_miserables.txt:68348:courtesy, spreading out her bridal toilet with both hands, and with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68349:tenderly roguish glance, she asked him:
tests/les_miserables.txt:68354:“Yes,” said Jean Valjean, “I am content!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68362:A few moments later, Basque announced that dinner was served.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68364:The guests, preceded by M. Gillenormand with Cosette on his arm,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68368:Two large armchairs figured on the right and left of the bride, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68370:took his seat. The other armchair remained empty.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68372:They looked about for M. Fauchelevent.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68378:“Do you know where M. Fauchelevent is?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68381:“Sir,” replied Basque, “I do, precisely. M. Fauchelevent told me to say
tests/les_miserables.txt:68383:somewhat, and that he could not dine with Monsieur le Baron and Madame
tests/les_miserables.txt:68384:la Baronne. That he begged to be excused, that he would come to-morrow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68388:That empty armchair chilled the effusion of the wedding feast for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68389:moment. But, if M. Fauchelevent was absent, M. Gillenormand was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68391:Fauchelevent had done well to retire early, if he were suffering, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:68392:that it was only a slight ailment. This declaration sufficed. Moreover,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68393:what is an obscure corner in such a submersion of joy? Cosette and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68394:Marius were passing through one of those egotistical and blessed
tests/les_miserables.txt:68395:moments when no other faculty is left to a person than that of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68396:receiving happiness. And then, an idea occurred to M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68397:Gillenormand.—“Pardieu, this armchair is empty. Come hither, Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68399:armchair is for you. That is legal and delightful. Fortunatus beside
tests/les_miserables.txt:68401:place beside Cosette, and things fell out so that Cosette, who had, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:68402:first, been saddened by Jean Valjean’s absence, ended by being
tests/les_miserables.txt:68403:satisfied with it. From the moment when Marius took his place, and was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68407:The armchair being occupied, M. Fauchelevent was obliterated; and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68408:nothing was lacking.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68414:champagne in his hand—only half full so that the palsy of his eighty
tests/les_miserables.txt:68415:years might not cause an overflow,—proposed the health of the married
tests/les_miserables.txt:68418:“You shall not escape two sermons,” he exclaimed. “This morning you had
tests/les_miserables.txt:68419:one from the curé, this evening you shall have one from your
tests/les_miserables.txt:68420:grandfather. Listen to me; I will give you a bit of advice: Adore each
tests/les_miserables.txt:68421:other. I do not make a pack of gyrations, I go straight to the mark, be
tests/les_miserables.txt:68422:happy. In all creation, only the turtledoves are wise. Philosophers
tests/les_miserables.txt:68423:say: ‘Moderate your joys.’ I say: ‘Give rein to your joys.’ Be as much
tests/les_miserables.txt:68424:smitten with each other as fiends. Be in a rage about it. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:68428:leaves, too much aurora in life? can people love each other too much?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68429:can people please each other too much? Take care, Estelle, thou art too
tests/les_miserables.txt:68430:pretty! Have a care, Nemorin, thou art too handsome! Fine stupidity, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:68431:sooth! Can people enchant each other too much, cajole each other too
tests/les_miserables.txt:68432:much, charm each other too much? Can one be too much alive, too happy?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68434:consists in jubilation. Make merry, let us make merry. Are we happy
tests/les_miserables.txt:68435:because we are good, or are we good because we are happy? Is the Sancy
tests/les_miserables.txt:68436:diamond called the Sancy because it belonged to Harley de Sancy, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:68437:because it weighs six hundred carats? I know nothing about it, life is
tests/les_miserables.txt:68438:full of such problems; the important point is to possess the Sancy and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68441:woman. Ah! ah! behold omnipotence—women. Ask that demagogue of a Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:68443:own free will, too, the coward! Woman! There is no Robespierre who
tests/les_miserables.txt:68444:keeps his place but woman reigns. I am no longer Royalist except
tests/les_miserables.txt:68446:There has been the royal sceptre surmounted by a fleur-de-lys, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:68447:has been the imperial sceptre surmounted by a globe, there has been the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68448:sceptre of Charlemagne, which was of iron, there has been the sceptre
tests/les_miserables.txt:68449:of Louis the Great, which was of gold,—the revolution twisted them
tests/les_miserables.txt:68451:is broken, it lies on the earth, there is no longer any sceptre, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:68452:make me a revolution against that little embroidered handkerchief,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68453:which smells of patchouli! I should like to see you do it. Try. Why is
tests/les_miserables.txt:68454:it so solid? Because it is a gewgaw. Ah! you are the nineteenth
tests/les_miserables.txt:68455:century? Well, what then? And we have been as foolish as you. Do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:68456:imagine that you have effected much change in the universe, because
tests/les_miserables.txt:68457:your trip-gallant is called the cholera-morbus, and because your
tests/les_miserables.txt:68458:_pourrée_ is called the cachuca. In fact, the women must always be
tests/les_miserables.txt:68459:loved. I defy you to escape from that. These friends are our angels.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68460:Yes, love, woman, the kiss forms a circle from which I defy you to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68461:escape; and, for my own part, I should be only too happy to re-enter
tests/les_miserables.txt:68462:it. Which of you has seen the planet Venus, the coquette of the abyss,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68463:the Célimène of the ocean, rise in the infinite, calming all here
tests/les_miserables.txt:68464:below? The ocean is a rough Alcestis. Well, grumble as he will, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:68465:Venus appears he is forced to smile. That brute beast submits. We are
tests/les_miserables.txt:68466:all made so. Wrath, tempest, claps of thunder, foam to the very
tests/les_miserables.txt:68467:ceiling. A woman enters on the scene, a planet rises; flat on your
tests/les_miserables.txt:68468:face! Marius was fighting six months ago; to-day he is married. That is
tests/les_miserables.txt:68470:each other, make us burst with rage that we cannot do the same,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68471:idealize each other, catch in your beaks all the tiny blades of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68472:felicity that exist on earth, and arrange yourselves a nest for life.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68473:Pardi, to love, to be loved, what a fine miracle when one is young!
tests/les_miserables.txt:68476:moonlight soul. Love is a child six thousand years old. Love has the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68478:For sixty centuries men and women have got out of their scrape by
tests/les_miserables.txt:68479:loving. The devil, who is cunning, took to hating man; man, who is
tests/les_miserables.txt:68480:still more cunning, took to loving woman. In this way he does more good
tests/les_miserables.txt:68481:than the devil does him harm. This craft was discovered in the days of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68483:perfectly new. Profit by it. Be Daphnis and Chloe, while waiting to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68484:become Philemon and Baucis. Manage so that, when you are with each
tests/les_miserables.txt:68485:other, nothing shall be lacking to you, and that Cosette may be the sun
tests/les_miserables.txt:68489:have filched the winning number in the lottery; you have gained the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68490:great prize, guard it well, keep it under lock and key, do not squander
tests/les_miserables.txt:68491:it, adore each other and snap your fingers at all the rest. Believe
tests/les_miserables.txt:68492:what I say to you. It is good sense. And good sense cannot lie. Be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68493:religion to each other. Each man has his own fashion of adoring God.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68495:thee!_ that’s my catechism. He who loves is orthodox. The oath of Henri
tests/les_miserables.txt:68496:IV. places sanctity somewhere between feasting and drunkenness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68499:friends, long live women! I am old, they say; it’s astonishing how much
tests/les_miserables.txt:68501:bagpipes in the woods. Children who contrive to be beautiful and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68502:contented,—that intoxicates me. I would like greatly to get married, if
tests/les_miserables.txt:68503:any one would have me. It is impossible to imagine that God could have
tests/les_miserables.txt:68504:made us for anything but this: to idolize, to coo, to preen ourselves,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68505:to be dove-like, to be dainty, to bill and coo our loves from morn to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68508:that displease you which we used to think in our day, when we were
tests/les_miserables.txt:68509:young folks. Ah! vertu-bamboche! what charming women there were in
tests/les_miserables.txt:68510:those days, and what pretty little faces and what lovely lasses! I
tests/les_miserables.txt:68511:committed my ravages among them. Then love each other. If people did
tests/les_miserables.txt:68512:not love each other, I really do not see what use there would be in
tests/les_miserables.txt:68515:from us and put back in his box, the flowers, the birds, and the pretty
tests/les_miserables.txt:68516:maidens. My children, receive an old man’s blessing.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68520:good humor gave the key-note to the whole feast, and each person
tests/les_miserables.txt:68521:regulated his conduct on that almost centenarian cordiality. They
tests/les_miserables.txt:68522:danced a little, they laughed a great deal; it was an amiable wedding.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68526:There was a tumult, then silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68530:A little after midnight, the Gillenormand house became a temple.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68535:The soul enters into contemplation before that sanctuary where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68536:celebration of love takes place.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68538:There should be flashes of light athwart such houses. The joy which
tests/les_miserables.txt:68539:they contain ought to make its escape through the stones of the walls
tests/les_miserables.txt:68540:in brilliancy, and vaguely illuminate the gloom. It is impossible that
tests/les_miserables.txt:68541:this sacred and fatal festival should not give off a celestial radiance
tests/les_miserables.txt:68542:to the infinite. Love is the sublime crucible wherein the fusion of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68543:man and the woman takes place; the being one, the being triple, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68544:being final, the human trinity proceeds from it. This birth of two
tests/les_miserables.txt:68546:priest; the ravished virgin is terrified. Something of that joy ascends
tests/les_miserables.txt:68549:shadows. If it were given to the eye of the flesh to scan the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68550:formidable and charming visions of the upper life, it is probable that
tests/les_miserables.txt:68553:the luminous house, satisfied, showering benedictions, pointing out to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68554:each other the virgin wife gently alarmed, sweetly terrified, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68555:bearing the reflection of human bliss upon their divine countenances.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68558:their chamber a confused rustling of wings. Perfect happiness implies a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68559:mutual understanding with the angels. That dark little chamber has all
tests/les_miserables.txt:68560:heaven for its ceiling. When two mouths, rendered sacred by love,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68561:approach to create, it is impossible that there should not be, above
tests/les_miserables.txt:68565:These felicities are the true ones. There is no joy outside of these
tests/les_miserables.txt:68566:joys. Love is the only ecstasy. All the rest weeps.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68568:To love, or to have loved,—this suffices. Demand nothing more. There is
tests/les_miserables.txt:68578:What had become of Jean Valjean?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68580:Immediately after having laughed, at Cosette’s graceful command, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:68582:gained the antechamber unperceived. This was the very room which, eight
tests/les_miserables.txt:68583:months before, he had entered black with mud, with blood and powder,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68584:bringing back the grandson to the grandfather. The old wainscoting was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68585:garlanded with foliage and flowers; the musicians were seated on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68586:sofa on which they had laid Marius down. Basque, in a black coat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68587:knee-breeches, white stockings and white gloves, was arranging roses
tests/les_miserables.txt:68589:his arm in its sling, charged Basque to explain his absence, and went
tests/les_miserables.txt:68593:stood for several minutes, erect and motionless in the darkness,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68594:beneath those radiant windows. He listened. The confused sounds of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68595:banquet reached his ear. He heard the loud, commanding tones of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68596:grandfather, the violins, the clatter of the plates, the bursts of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68598:sweet and joyous voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68604:Culture-Sainte-Catherine, and the Blancs-Manteaux; it was a little
tests/les_miserables.txt:68605:longer, but it was the road through which, for the last three months,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68606:he had become accustomed to pass every day on his way from the Rue de
tests/les_miserables.txt:68608:obstructions and the mud in the Rue Vieille-du-Temple.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68610:This road, through which Cosette had passed, excluded for him all
tests/les_miserables.txt:68613:Jean Valjean entered his lodgings. He lighted his candle and mounted
tests/les_miserables.txt:68615:there. Jean Valjean’s step made more noise than usual in the chambers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68616:All the cupboards stood open. He penetrated to Cosette’s bedroom. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:68617:were no sheets on the bed. The pillow, covered with ticking, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68618:without a case or lace, was laid on the blankets folded up on the foot
tests/les_miserables.txt:68619:of the mattress, whose covering was visible, and on which no one was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68620:ever to sleep again. All the little feminine objects which Cosette was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68621:attached to had been carried away; nothing remained except the heavy
tests/les_miserables.txt:68626:Jean Valjean looked at the walls, closed some of the cupboard doors,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68627:and went and came from one room to another.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68629:Then he sought his own chamber once more, and set his candle on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68635:He approached his bed, and his eyes rested, was it by chance? was it
tests/les_miserables.txt:68636:intentionally? on the _inseparable_ of which Cosette had been jealous,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68637:on the little portmanteau which never left him. On his arrival in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68640:vivacity, took a key from his pocket, and opened the valise.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68642:From it he slowly drew forth the garments in which, ten years before,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68643:Cosette had quitted Montfermeil; first the little gown, then the black
tests/les_miserables.txt:68644:fichu, then the stout, coarse child’s shoes which Cosette might almost
tests/les_miserables.txt:68645:have worn still, so tiny were her feet, then the fustian bodice, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:68646:was very thick, then the knitted petticoat, next the apron with
tests/les_miserables.txt:68647:pockets, then the woollen stockings. These stockings, which still
tests/les_miserables.txt:68648:preserved the graceful form of a tiny leg, were no longer than Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:68649:Valjean’s hand. All this was black of hue. It was he who had brought
tests/les_miserables.txt:68651:valise, he laid them on the bed. He fell to thinking. He called up
tests/les_miserables.txt:68652:memories. It was in winter, in a very cold month of December, she was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68655:to clothe herself in these mourning habiliments. The mother must have
tests/les_miserables.txt:68657:her, and, above all, to see that she was properly clothed, and that she
tests/les_miserables.txt:68661:sky; it mattered not, it was charming. He arranged the tiny garments on
tests/les_miserables.txt:68662:the bed, the fichu next to the petticoat, the stockings beside the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68665:in the pocket of that apron, she had laughed, they walked hand in hand,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68668:Then his venerable, white head fell forward on the bed, that stoical
tests/les_miserables.txt:68669:old heart broke, his face was engulfed, so to speak, in Cosette’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:68679:The old and formidable struggle, of which we have already witnessed so
tests/les_miserables.txt:68680:many phases, began once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68682:Jacob struggled with the angel but one night. Alas! how many times have
tests/les_miserables.txt:68683:we beheld Jean Valjean seized bodily by his conscience, in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68686:Unheard-of conflict! At certain moments the foot slips; at other
tests/les_miserables.txt:68687:moments the ground crumbles away underfoot. How many times had that
tests/les_miserables.txt:68688:conscience, mad for the good, clasped and overthrown him! How many
tests/les_miserables.txt:68690:times, hurled to earth by the light, had he begged for mercy! How many
tests/les_miserables.txt:68691:times had that implacable spark, lighted within him, and upon him by
tests/les_miserables.txt:68692:the Bishop, dazzled him by force when he had wished to be blind! How
tests/les_miserables.txt:68693:many times had he risen to his feet in the combat, held fast to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68694:rock, leaning against sophism, dragged in the dust, now getting the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68695:upper hand of his conscience, again overthrown by it! How many times,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68696:after an equivoque, after the specious and treacherous reasoning of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68697:egotism, had he heard his irritated conscience cry in his ear: “A trip!
tests/les_miserables.txt:68698:you wretch!” How many times had his refractory thoughts rattled
tests/les_miserables.txt:68699:convulsively in his throat, under the evidence of duty! Resistance to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68700:God. Funereal sweats. What secret wounds which he alone felt bleed!
tests/les_miserables.txt:68701:What excoriations in his lamentable existence! How many times he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:68704:conqueror. And, after having dislocated, broken, and rent his
tests/les_miserables.txt:68705:conscience with red-hot pincers, it had said to him, as it stood over
tests/les_miserables.txt:68706:him, formidable, luminous, and tranquil: “Now, go in peace!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68709:But on emerging from so melancholy a conflict, what a lugubrious peace,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68713:his final combat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68717:Predestinations are not all direct; they do not open out in a straight
tests/les_miserables.txt:68718:avenue before the predestined man; they have blind courts, impassable
tests/les_miserables.txt:68719:alleys, obscure turns, disturbing crossroads offering the choice of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68721:of these crossroads.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68723:He had come to the supreme crossing of good and evil. He had that
tests/les_miserables.txt:68724:gloomy intersection beneath his eyes. On this occasion once more, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:68725:had happened to him already in other sad vicissitudes, two roads opened
tests/les_miserables.txt:68728:Which was he to take?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68730:He was counselled to the one which alarmed him by that mysterious index
tests/les_miserables.txt:68731:finger which we all perceive whenever we fix our eyes on the darkness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68733:Once more, Jean Valjean had the choice between the terrible port and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68736:Is it then true? the soul may recover; but not fate. Frightful thing!
tests/les_miserables.txt:68737:an incurable destiny!
tests/les_miserables.txt:68739:This is the problem which presented itself to him:
tests/les_miserables.txt:68744:entrails, and at that moment, when he reflected on it, he was able to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68745:enjoy the sort of satisfaction which an armorer would experience on
tests/les_miserables.txt:68746:recognizing his factory mark on a knife, on withdrawing it, all
tests/les_miserables.txt:68750:riches. And this was his doing.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68753:existed, now that it was there? Should he force himself on this
tests/les_miserables.txt:68756:all that he could retain? Should he remain the sort of father, half
tests/les_miserables.txt:68757:seen but respected, which he had hitherto been? Should he, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:68760:that luminous fireside? Should he take those innocent hands into his
tests/les_miserables.txt:68761:tragic hands, with a smile? Should he place upon the peaceful fender of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68762:the Gillenormand drawing-room those feet of his, which dragged behind
tests/les_miserables.txt:68763:them the disgraceful shadow of the law? Should he enter into
tests/les_miserables.txt:68764:participation in the fair fortunes of Cosette and Marius? Should he
tests/les_miserables.txt:68765:render the obscurity on his brow and the cloud upon theirs still more
tests/les_miserables.txt:68766:dense? Should he place his catastrophe as a third associate in their
tests/les_miserables.txt:68767:felicity? Should he continue to hold his peace? In a word, should he be
tests/les_miserables.txt:68770:We must have become habituated to fatality and to encounters with it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68771:in order to have the daring to raise our eyes when certain questions
tests/les_miserables.txt:68779:He examined the pitiless problem under all its aspects.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68781:Cosette, that charming existence, was the raft of this shipwreck. What
tests/les_miserables.txt:68782:was he to do? To cling fast to it, or to let go his hold?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68784:If he clung to it, he should emerge from disaster, he should ascend
tests/les_miserables.txt:68792:Thus he took sad council with his thoughts. Or, to speak more
tests/les_miserables.txt:68793:correctly, he fought; he kicked furiously internally, now against his
tests/les_miserables.txt:68794:will, now against his conviction.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68798:than the one which had formerly driven him to Arras, broke loose within
tests/les_miserables.txt:68799:him. The past surged up before him facing the present; he compared them
tests/les_miserables.txt:68800:and sobbed. The silence of tears once opened, the despairing man
tests/les_miserables.txt:68808:for a possible flight, seeking an escape, what an abrupt and sinister
tests/les_miserables.txt:68809:resistance does the foot of the wall offer in our rear!
tests/les_miserables.txt:68811:To feel the sacred shadow which forms an obstacle!
tests/les_miserables.txt:68815:Then, one is never done with conscience. Make your choice, Brutus; make
tests/les_miserables.txt:68816:your choice, Cato. It is fathomless, since it is God. One flings into
tests/les_miserables.txt:68818:one flings in one’s riches, one flings in one’s success, one flings in
tests/les_miserables.txt:68823:Somewhere in the fog of the ancient hells, there is a tun like that.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68826:have any right? Are not chains which are endless above human strength?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68830:The obedience of matter is limited by friction; is there no limit to
tests/les_miserables.txt:68831:the obedience of the soul? If perpetual motion is impossible, can
tests/les_miserables.txt:68832:perpetual self-sacrifice be exacted?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68834:The first step is nothing, it is the last which is difficult. What was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68835:the Champmathieu affair in comparison with Cosette’s marriage and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68836:that which it entailed? What is a re-entrance into the galleys,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68837:compared to entrance into the void?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68839:Oh, first step that must be descended, how sombre art thou! Oh, second
tests/les_miserables.txt:68840:step, how black art thou!
tests/les_miserables.txt:68842:How could he refrain from turning aside his head this time?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68844:Martyrdom is sublimation, corrosive sublimation. It is a torture which
tests/les_miserables.txt:68845:consecrates. One can consent to it for the first hour; one seats
tests/les_miserables.txt:68846:oneself on the throne of glowing iron, one places on one’s head the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68847:crown of hot iron, one accepts the globe of red hot iron, one takes the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68848:sceptre of red hot iron, but the mantle of flame still remains to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:68849:donned, and comes there not a moment when the miserable flesh revolts
tests/les_miserables.txt:68850:and when one abdicates from suffering?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68852:At length, Jean Valjean entered into the peace of exhaustion.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68854:He weighed, he reflected, he considered the alternatives, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68855:mysterious balance of light and darkness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68857:Should he impose his galleys on those two dazzling children, or should
tests/les_miserables.txt:68858:he consummate his irremediable engulfment by himself? On one side lay
tests/les_miserables.txt:68859:the sacrifice of Cosette, on the other that of himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68861:At what solution should he arrive? What decision did he come to?
tests/les_miserables.txt:68865:decide to open? Which side of his life did he resolve upon closing and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68866:condemning? Among all the unfathomable precipices which surrounded him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68867:which was his choice? What extremity did he accept? To which of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68873:over that bed, prostrate beneath the enormity of fate, crushed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68874:perchance, alas! with clenched fists, with arms outspread at right
tests/les_miserables.txt:68875:angles, like a man crucified who has been un-nailed, and flung face
tests/les_miserables.txt:68877:hours of a long winter’s night, ice-cold, without once raising his
tests/les_miserables.txt:68878:head, and without uttering a word. He was as motionless as a corpse,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68881:have pronounced him dead; all at once he shuddered convulsively, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:68882:his mouth, glued to Cosette’s garments, kissed them; then it could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:68885:Who could see? Since Jean Valjean was alone, and there was no one
tests/les_miserables.txt:68906:The days that follow weddings are solitary. People respect the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68908:degree. The tumult of visits and congratulations only begins later on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68911:setting his antechamber to rights, heard a light tap at the door. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:68912:had been no ring, which was discreet on such a day. Basque opened the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68913:door, and beheld M. Fauchelevent. He introduced him into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68914:drawing-room, still encumbered and topsy-turvy, and which bore the air
tests/les_miserables.txt:68915:of a field of battle after the joys of the preceding evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68927:“Which one? the old one or the new one?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68930:“Monsieur Pontmercy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68935:A man is a Baron most of all to his servants. He counts for something
tests/les_miserables.txt:68936:with them; they are what a philosopher would call, bespattered with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68938:militant republican as he had proved, was now a Baron in spite of
tests/les_miserables.txt:68939:himself. A small revolution had taken place in the family in connection
tests/les_miserables.txt:68940:with this title. It was now M. Gillenormand who clung to it, and Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:68941:who detached himself from it. But Colonel Pontmercy had written: “My
tests/les_miserables.txt:68946:him that M. Fauchelevent is here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:68953:“Ah!” ejaculated Basque.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68958:“Ah!” ejaculated Basque once more, emitting his second “ah!” as an
tests/les_miserables.txt:68968:which had fallen from garlands and head-dresses. The wax candles,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68969:burned to stumps, added stalactites of wax to the crystal drops of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68970:chandeliers. Not a single piece of furniture was in its place. In the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68971:corners, three or four armchairs, drawn close together in a circle, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:68972:the appearance of continuing a conversation. The whole effect was
tests/les_miserables.txt:68973:cheerful. A certain grace still lingers round a dead feast. It has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:68974:a happy thing. On the chairs in disarray, among those fading flowers,
tests/les_miserables.txt:68975:beneath those extinct lights, people have thought of joy. The sun had
tests/les_miserables.txt:68976:succeeded to the chandelier, and made its way gayly into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68982:their orbits. His black coat bore the weary folds of a garment that has
tests/les_miserables.txt:68983:been up all night. The elbows were whitened with the down which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:68984:friction of cloth against linen leaves behind it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68989:There came a sound at the door, and he raised his eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:68991:Marius entered, his head well up, his mouth smiling, an indescribable
tests/les_miserables.txt:68992:light on his countenance, his brow expanded, his eyes triumphant. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:68995:“It is you, father!” he exclaimed, on catching sight of Jean Valjean;
tests/les_miserables.txt:68996:“that idiot of a Basque had such a mysterious air! But you have come
tests/les_miserables.txt:69000:That word: “Father,” said to M. Fauchelevent by Marius, signified:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69001:supreme felicity. There had always existed, as the reader knows, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69002:lofty wall, a coldness and a constraint between them; ice which must be
tests/les_miserables.txt:69003:broken or melted. Marius had reached that point of intoxication when
tests/les_miserables.txt:69004:the wall was lowered, when the ice dissolved, and when M. Fauchelevent
tests/les_miserables.txt:69007:He continued: his words poured forth, as is the peculiarity of divine
tests/les_miserables.txt:69014:And, satisfied with the favorable reply which he had made to himself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69018:must not forget that you have a chamber here, We want nothing more to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69020:could you go to live in a street like that, which is sickly, which is
tests/les_miserables.txt:69021:disagreeable, which is ugly, which has a barrier at one end, where one
tests/les_miserables.txt:69022:is cold, and into which one cannot enter? You are to come and install
tests/les_miserables.txt:69025:your own chamber here, it is close to ours, it opens on the garden; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69026:trouble with the clock has been attended to, the bed is made, it is all
tests/les_miserables.txt:69028:has placed a huge, old, easy-chair covered with Utrecht velvet and she
tests/les_miserables.txt:69029:has said to it: ‘Stretch out your arms to him.’ A nightingale comes to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69030:the clump of acacias opposite your windows, every spring. In two months
tests/les_miserables.txt:69033:Your chamber faces due South. Cosette will arrange your books for you,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69034:your Voyages of Captain Cook and the other,—Vancouver’s and all your
tests/les_miserables.txt:69035:affairs. I believe that there is a little valise to which you are
tests/les_miserables.txt:69036:attached, I have fixed upon a corner of honor for that. You have
tests/les_miserables.txt:69037:conquered my grandfather, you suit him. We will live together. Do you
tests/les_miserables.txt:69040:at the courts, you shall give her your arm, you know, as you used to,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69042:shall be included in it, in our happiness, do you hear, father? Come,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69047:ex-convict.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69050:The limit of shrill sounds perceptible can be overleaped, as well in
tests/les_miserables.txt:69051:the case of the mind as in that of the ear. These words: “I am an
tests/les_miserables.txt:69052:ex-convict,” proceeding from the mouth of M. Fauchelevent and entering
tests/les_miserables.txt:69057:Then he perceived that the man who was addressing him was frightful.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69061:Jean Valjean untied the black cravat which supported his right arm,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69071:There was, in fact, no trace of any injury.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69073:Jean Valjean continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69076:myself as much as was in my power. So I invented this injury in order
tests/les_miserables.txt:69077:that I might not commit a forgery, that I might not introduce a flaw
tests/les_miserables.txt:69078:into the marriage documents, in order that I might escape from
tests/les_miserables.txt:69091:“You are driving me mad!” exclaimed Marius in terror.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69093:“Monsieur Pontmercy,” said Jean Valjean, “I was nineteen years in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69094:galleys. For theft. Then, I was condemned for life for theft, for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69095:second offence. At the present moment, I have broken my ban.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69098:In vain did Marius recoil before the reality, refuse the fact, resist
tests/les_miserables.txt:69099:the evidence, he was forced to give way. He began to understand, and,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69100:as always happens in such cases, he understood too much. An inward
tests/les_miserables.txt:69101:shudder of hideous enlightenment flashed through him; an idea which
tests/les_miserables.txt:69102:made him quiver traversed his mind. He caught a glimpse of a wretched
tests/les_miserables.txt:69105:“Say all, say all!” he cried. “You are Cosette’s father!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69108:And he retreated a couple of paces with a movement of indescribable
tests/les_miserables.txt:69111:Jean Valjean elevated his head with so much majesty of attitude that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:69112:seemed to grow even to the ceiling.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69114:“It is necessary that you should believe me here, sir; although our
tests/les_miserables.txt:69115:oath to others may not be received in law . . .”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69118:Here he paused, then, with a sort of sovereign and sepulchral
tests/les_miserables.txt:69119:authority, he added, articulating slowly, and emphasizing the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69123:Monsieur le Baron Pontmercy, I am a peasant of Faverolles. I earned my
tests/les_miserables.txt:69124:living by pruning trees. My name is not Fauchelevent, but Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69133:“I. Since I tell you so.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69136:Marius looked at the man. He was melancholy yet tranquil. No lie could
tests/les_miserables.txt:69137:proceed from such a calm. That which is icy is sincere. The truth could
tests/les_miserables.txt:69138:be felt in that chill of the tomb.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69143:continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69146:she was in existence. I love her, it is true. One loves a child whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:69148:feels oneself a grandfather towards all little children. You may, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:69149:seems to me, suppose that I have something which resembles a heart. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:69151:why I began to love her. Children are so weak that the first comer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69152:even a man like me, can become their protector. I have fulfilled this
tests/les_miserables.txt:69153:duty towards Cosette. I do not think that so slight a thing can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:69154:called a good action; but if it be a good action, well, say that I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:69155:done it. Register this attenuating circumstance. To-day, Cosette passes
tests/les_miserables.txt:69156:out of my life; our two roads part. Henceforth, I can do nothing for
tests/les_miserables.txt:69157:her. She is Madame Pontmercy. Her providence has changed. And Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:69158:gains by the change. All is well. As for the six hundred thousand
tests/les_miserables.txt:69159:francs, you do not mention them to me, but I forestall your thought,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69160:they are a deposit. How did that deposit come into my hands? What does
tests/les_miserables.txt:69161:that matter? I restore the deposit. Nothing more can be demanded of me.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69162:I complete the restitution by announcing my true name. That concerns
tests/les_miserables.txt:69166:And Jean Valjean looked Marius full in the face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69168:All that Marius experienced was tumultuous and incoherent. Certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:69169:gusts of destiny produce these billows in our souls.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69171:We have all undergone moments of trouble in which everything within us
tests/les_miserables.txt:69172:is dispersed; we say the first things that occur to us, which are not
tests/les_miserables.txt:69173:always precisely those which should be said. There are sudden
tests/les_miserables.txt:69174:revelations which one cannot bear, and which intoxicate like baleful
tests/les_miserables.txt:69175:wine. Marius was stupefied by the novel situation which presented
tests/les_miserables.txt:69179:“But why,” he exclaimed, “do you tell me all this? Who forces you to do
tests/les_miserables.txt:69180:so? You could have kept your secret to yourself. You are neither
tests/les_miserables.txt:69181:denounced, nor tracked nor pursued. You have a reason for wantonly
tests/les_miserables.txt:69182:making such a revelation. Conclude. There is something more. In what
tests/les_miserables.txt:69183:connection do you make this confession? What is your motive?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69186:“My motive?” replied Jean Valjean in a voice so low and dull that one
tests/les_miserables.txt:69188:“From what motive, in fact, has this convict just said ‘I am a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69189:convict’? Well, yes! the motive is strange. It is out of honesty. Stay,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69190:the unfortunate point is that I have a thread in my heart, which keeps
tests/les_miserables.txt:69191:me fast. It is when one is old that that sort of thread is particularly
tests/les_miserables.txt:69193:to tear out that thread, to break it, to undo the knot or to cut it, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69195:diligences in the Rue Bouloy; you are happy; I am going. I have tried
tests/les_miserables.txt:69197:my heart with it. Then I said: ‘I cannot live anywhere else than here.’
tests/les_miserables.txt:69199:remain here? You offer me a chamber in this house, Madame Pontmercy is
tests/les_miserables.txt:69200:sincerely attached to me, she said to the armchair: ‘Stretch out your
tests/les_miserables.txt:69202:I suit him, we shall live together, and take our meals in common, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:69203:shall give Cosette my arm . . . Madame Pontmercy, excuse me, it is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69205:chimney-corner in winter, the same promenade in summer, that is joy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69210:At that word, Jean Valjean became wild. He folded his arms, glared at
tests/les_miserables.txt:69211:the floor beneath his feet as though he would have excavated an abyss
tests/les_miserables.txt:69212:therein, and his voice suddenly rose in thundering tones:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69217:of the sort for me. I am an unlucky wretch; I am left outside. Did I
tests/les_miserables.txt:69219:that child in marriage, all came to an end. I have seen her happy, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:69222:and that it was well, I said to myself: ‘Enter thou not.’ I could have
tests/les_miserables.txt:69223:lied, it is true, have deceived you all, and remained Monsieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:69224:Fauchelevent. So long as it was for her, I could lie; but now it would
tests/les_miserables.txt:69225:be for myself, and I must not. It was sufficient for me to hold my
tests/les_miserables.txt:69226:peace, it is true, and all would go on. You ask me what has forced me
tests/les_miserables.txt:69227:to speak? a very odd thing; my conscience. To hold my peace was very
tests/les_miserables.txt:69232:done what I could. But there are two things in which I have not
tests/les_miserables.txt:69233:succeeded; in breaking the thread that holds me fixed, riveted and
tests/les_miserables.txt:69234:sealed here by the heart, or in silencing some one who speaks softly to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69235:me when I am alone. That is why I have come hither to tell you
tests/les_miserables.txt:69237:to tell you that which concerns only myself; I keep that to myself. You
tests/les_miserables.txt:69239:it to you. And I have disembowelled my secret before your eyes. It was
tests/les_miserables.txt:69242:affair, that by concealing my name I was doing no one any injury, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:69243:the name of Fauchelevent had been given to me by Fauchelevent himself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69244:out of gratitude for a service rendered to him, and that I might
tests/les_miserables.txt:69245:assuredly keep it, and that I should be happy in that chamber which you
tests/les_miserables.txt:69247:own little corner, and that, while you would have Cosette, I should
tests/les_miserables.txt:69248:have the idea that I was in the same house with her. Each one of us
tests/les_miserables.txt:69249:would have had his share of happiness. If I continued to be Monsieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:69250:Fauchelevent, that would arrange everything. Yes, with the exception of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69251:my soul. There was joy everywhere upon my surface, but the bottom of my
tests/les_miserables.txt:69252:soul remained black. It is not enough to be happy, one must be content.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69253:Thus I should have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent, thus I should have
tests/les_miserables.txt:69254:concealed my true visage, thus, in the presence of your expansion, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:69256:should have had shadows, thus, without crying ‘’ware,’ I should have
tests/les_miserables.txt:69257:simply introduced the galleys to your fireside, I should have taken my
tests/les_miserables.txt:69260:domestics who, had they known, would have said: ‘How horrible!’ I
tests/les_miserables.txt:69261:should have touched you with my elbow, which you have a right to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69262:dislike, I should have filched your clasps of the hand! There would
tests/les_miserables.txt:69263:have existed in your house a division of respect between venerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:69264:white locks and tainted white locks; at your most intimate hours, when
tests/les_miserables.txt:69268:you in your existence, having for my only care not to disarrange the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69269:cover of my dreadful pit. Thus, I, a dead man, should have thrust
tests/les_miserables.txt:69270:myself upon you who are living beings. I should have condemned her to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69272:heads in the green cap! Does it not make you shudder? I am only the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69273:most crushed of men; I should have been the most monstrous of men. And
tests/les_miserables.txt:69274:I should have committed that crime every day! And I should have had
tests/les_miserables.txt:69275:that face of night upon my visage every day! every day! And I should
tests/les_miserables.txt:69276:have communicated to you a share in my taint every day! every day! to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69277:you, my dearly beloved, my children, to you, my innocent creatures! Is
tests/les_miserables.txt:69278:it nothing to hold one’s peace? is it a simple matter to keep silence?
tests/les_miserables.txt:69279:No, it is not simple. There is a silence which lies. And my lie, and my
tests/les_miserables.txt:69280:fraud and my indignity, and my cowardice and my treason and my crime, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:69285:eaten it, with my bread, and I should have looked Cosette in the face,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69292:Jean Valjean paused. Marius listened. Such chains of ideas and of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69293:anguishes cannot be interrupted. Jean Valjean lowered his voice once
tests/les_miserables.txt:69294:more, but it was no longer a dull voice—it was a sinister voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69296:“You ask why I speak? I am neither denounced, nor pursued, nor tracked,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69297:you say. Yes! I am denounced! yes! I am tracked! By whom? By myself. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:69299:myself, and I arrest myself, and I execute myself, and when one holds
tests/les_miserables.txt:69303:And, seizing a handful of his own coat by the nape of the neck and
tests/les_miserables.txt:69306:“Do you see that fist?” he continued. “Don’t you think that it holds
tests/les_miserables.txt:69307:that collar in such a wise as not to release it? Well! conscience is
tests/les_miserables.txt:69309:understand duty; for, as soon as one has comprehended it, it is
tests/les_miserables.txt:69310:implacable. One would say that it punished you for comprehending it;
tests/les_miserables.txt:69311:but no, it rewards you; for it places you in a hell, where you feel God
tests/les_miserables.txt:69312:beside you. One has no sooner lacerated his own entrails than he is at
tests/les_miserables.txt:69313:peace with himself.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69316:And, with a poignant accent, he added:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69318:“Monsieur Pontmercy, this is not common sense, I am an honest man. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:69320:This has happened to me once before, but it was less painful then; it
tests/les_miserables.txt:69322:my fault, you had continued to esteem me; now that you despise me, I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:69324:have anything but stolen consideration, that consideration humiliates
tests/les_miserables.txt:69325:me, and crushes me inwardly, and, in order that I may respect myself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69326:it is necessary that I should be despised. Then I straighten up again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69327:I am a galley-slave who obeys his conscience. I know well that that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:69329:fact. I have entered into engagements with myself; I keep them. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:69330:are encounters which bind us, there are chances which involve us in
tests/les_miserables.txt:69331:duties. You see, Monsieur Pontmercy, various things have happened to me
tests/les_miserables.txt:69332:in the course of my life.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69338:“When one has such a horror hanging over one, one has not the right to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69340:make them slip over one’s own precipice without their perceiving it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69342:no right to slyly encumber with one’s misery the happiness of others.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69343:It is hideous to approach those who are healthy, and to touch them in
tests/les_miserables.txt:69344:the dark with one’s ulcer. In spite of the fact that Fauchelevent lent
tests/les_miserables.txt:69345:me his name, I have no right to use it; he could give it to me, but I
tests/les_miserables.txt:69346:could not take it. A name is an _I_. You see, sir, that I have thought
tests/les_miserables.txt:69348:that I express myself properly. I understand things. I have procured
tests/les_miserables.txt:69349:myself an education. Well, yes, to abstract a name and to place oneself
tests/les_miserables.txt:69350:under it is dishonest. Letters of the alphabet can be filched, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69351:purse or a watch. To be a false signature in flesh and blood, to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69352:living false key, to enter the house of honest people by picking their
tests/les_miserables.txt:69353:lock, never more to look straightforward, to forever eye askance, to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:69371:his head several times in succession.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69373:A silence ensued. Both held their peace, each plunged in a gulf of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69374:thoughts. Marius was sitting near a table and resting the corner of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:69375:mouth on one of his fingers, which was folded back. Jean Valjean was
tests/les_miserables.txt:69376:pacing to and fro. He paused before a mirror, and remained motionless.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69377:Then, as though replying to some inward course of reasoning, he said,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69378:as he gazed at the mirror, which he did not see:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69383:He took up his march again, and walked to the other end of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69384:drawing-room. At the moment when he turned round, he perceived that
tests/les_miserables.txt:69385:Marius was watching his walk. Then he said, with an inexpressible
tests/les_miserables.txt:69394:Monsieur Fauchelevent, I have taken my place in your house, I am one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69395:you, I am in my chamber, I come to breakfast in the morning in
tests/les_miserables.txt:69396:slippers, in the evening all three of us go to the play, I accompany
tests/les_miserables.txt:69397:Madame Pontmercy to the Tuileries, and to the Place Royale, we are
tests/les_miserables.txt:69399:there, we are conversing, we are laughing; all at once, you hear a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69400:voice shouting this name: ‘Jean Valjean!’ and behold, that terrible
tests/les_miserables.txt:69401:hand, the police, darts from the darkness, and abruptly tears off my
tests/les_miserables.txt:69411:Marius’ silence answered for him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69413:Jean Valjean continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69415:“You see that I am right in not holding my peace. Be happy, be in
tests/les_miserables.txt:69416:heaven, be the angel of an angel, exist in the sun, be content
tests/les_miserables.txt:69417:therewith, and do not trouble yourself about the means which a poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:69418:damned wretch takes to open his breast and force his duty to come
tests/les_miserables.txt:69419:forth; you have before you, sir, a wretched man.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69422:Marius slowly crossed the room, and, when he was quite close to Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:69425:But Marius was obliged to step up and take that hand which was not
tests/les_miserables.txt:69429:“My grandfather has friends,” said Marius; “I will procure your
tests/les_miserables.txt:69434:that suffices. The dead are not subjected to surveillance. They are
tests/les_miserables.txt:69435:supposed to rot in peace. Death is the same thing as pardon.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69438:And, disengaging the hand which Marius held, he added, with a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69441:“Moreover, the friend to whom I have recourse is the doing of my duty;
tests/les_miserables.txt:69442:and I need but one pardon, that of my conscience.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69447:only her sweet face, her hair was in charming disorder, her eyelids
tests/les_miserables.txt:69448:were still swollen with sleep. She made the movement of a bird, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:69449:thrusts its head out of its nest, glanced first at her husband, then at
tests/les_miserables.txt:69450:Jean Valjean, and cried to them with a smile, so that they seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69453:“I will wager that you are talking politics. How stupid that is,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69461:And he paused. One would have said that they were two criminals.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69463:Cosette, who was radiant, continued to gaze at both of them. There was
tests/les_miserables.txt:69466:“I have caught you in the very act,” said Cosette. “Just now, I heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:69467:my father Fauchelevent through the door saying: ‘Conscience . . . doing
tests/les_miserables.txt:69468:my duty . . .’ That is politics, indeed it is. I will not have it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69469:People should not talk politics the very next day. It is not right.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69473:are discussing the best investment of your six hundred thousand francs
tests/les_miserables.txt:69477:“That is not it at all,” interrupted Cosette. “I am coming. Does
tests/les_miserables.txt:69483:folds and large sleeves which, starting from the neck, fell to her
tests/les_miserables.txt:69484:feet. In the golden heavens of some ancient gothic pictures, there are
tests/les_miserables.txt:69485:these charming sacks fit to clothe the angels.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69487:She contemplated herself from head to foot in a long mirror, then
tests/les_miserables.txt:69488:exclaimed, in an outburst of ineffable ecstasy:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69490:“There was once a King and a Queen. Oh! how happy I am!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69493:That said, she made a curtsey to Marius and to Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69496:easy-chair, we breakfast in half an hour, you shall say anything you
tests/les_miserables.txt:69505:“By the way,” said Cosette, “I have opened my window, a flock of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69514:“You have a charming cravat on this morning, Marius. You are very
tests/les_miserables.txt:69521:“No. Since it is you. I shall not understand you, but I shall listen to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69522:you. When one hears the voices of those whom one loves, one does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:69536:“Very good,” said Cosette. “I was going to tell you some news. I could
tests/les_miserables.txt:69538:at mass, that the chimney in my father Fauchelevent’s room smokes, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:69539:Nicolette has sent for the chimney-sweep, that Toussaint and Nicolette
tests/les_miserables.txt:69540:have already quarrelled, that Nicolette makes sport of Toussaint’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:69542:see, gentlemen, that I, in my turn, can say: It is impossible. Then who
tests/les_miserables.txt:69543:will be caught? I beseech you, my little Marius, let me stay here with
tests/les_miserables.txt:69555:“In the first place, father, I want you to come and embrace me. What do
tests/les_miserables.txt:69557:such a father as that? You must perceive that my family life is very
tests/les_miserables.txt:69558:unhappy. My husband beats me. Come, embrace me instantly.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69561:Jean Valjean approached.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69565:“As for you, I shall make a face at you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69570:Jean Valjean advanced a step toward her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69572:Cosette recoiled.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69591:“Embrace me if you are well, if you sleep well, if you are content, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:69592:will not scold you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69597:Jean Valjean dropped a kiss upon that brow whereon rested a celestial
tests/les_miserables.txt:69603:Jean Valjean obeyed. It was the smile of a spectre.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69608:“Cosette! . . .” ejaculated Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69610:“Get angry, father. Say that I must stay. You can certainly talk before
tests/les_miserables.txt:69612:placing money in a bank a great matter truly. Men make mysteries out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69616:And with an adorable shrug of the shoulders, and an indescribably
tests/les_miserables.txt:69617:exquisite pout, she glanced at Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69623:And they fell irresistibly into each other’s arms.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69626:triumphant little grimace, “I shall stay.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69629:“No, not that,” said Marius, in a supplicating tone. “We have to finish
tests/les_miserables.txt:69641:“Ah! you put on your man’s voice, sir. That is well, I go. You, father,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69651:Two seconds later, the door opened once more, her fresh and rosy head
tests/les_miserables.txt:69652:was again thrust between the two leaves, and she cried to them:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69657:The door closed again, and the shadows descended once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69660:night, without itself being conscious of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69662:Marius made sure that the door was securely closed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69672:for one thing, but not for another. Sir, I conjure you, I entreat now,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69673:sir, give me your most sacred word of honor, that you will not tell
tests/les_miserables.txt:69675:it myself without being forced to it, I could have told it to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69677:not know what it is, it would terrify her. What, a convict! we should
tests/les_miserables.txt:69679:has been in the galleys.’ She saw the chain-gang pass by one day. Oh!
tests/les_miserables.txt:69680:My God!” . . . He dropped into an armchair and hid his face in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:69686:There is something of suffocation in the sob. He was seized with a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:69687:of convulsion, he threw himself against the back of the chair as though
tests/les_miserables.txt:69689:face inundated with tears, and Marius heard him murmur, so low that his
tests/les_miserables.txt:69690:voice seemed to issue from fathomless depths:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69692:“Oh! would that I could die!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69695:“Be at your ease,” said Marius, “I will keep your secret for myself
tests/les_miserables.txt:69699:And, less touched, perhaps, than he ought to have been, but forced, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:69700:the last hour, to familiarize himself with something as unexpected as
tests/les_miserables.txt:69701:it was dreadful, gradually beholding the convict superposed before his
tests/les_miserables.txt:69702:very eyes, upon M. Fauchelevent, overcome, little by little, by that
tests/les_miserables.txt:69703:lugubrious reality, and led, by the natural inclination of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69704:situation, to recognize the space which had just been placed between
tests/les_miserables.txt:69708:the deposit which you have so faithfully and honestly remitted. That is
tests/les_miserables.txt:69709:an act of probity. It is just that some recompense should be bestowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:69710:on you. Fix the sum yourself, it shall be counted out to you. Do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:69716:He remained in thought for a moment, mechanically passing the tip of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69717:his fore-finger across his thumb-nail, then he lifted up his voice:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69726:voice, without breath, he stammered rather than said:
tests/les_miserables.txt:69732:“I think that would be better,” replied Marius coldly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69734:“I shall never see her more,” murmured Jean Valjean. And he directed
tests/les_miserables.txt:69737:He laid his hand on the knob, the latch yielded, the door opened. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:69739:a second, then closed the door again and turned to Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69742:his eyes, but only a sort of tragic flame. His voice had regained a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69743:strange composure.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69745:“Stay, sir,” he said. “If you will allow it, I will come to see her. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:69746:assure you that I desire it greatly. If I had not cared to see Cosette,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69747:I should not have made to you the confession that I have made, I should
tests/les_miserables.txt:69748:have gone away; but, as I desired to remain in the place where Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:69749:is, and to continue to see her, I had to tell you about it honestly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69752:first in that hut on the boulevard, then in the convent, then near the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69756:back court-yard, whence I could hear her piano. That was my life. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:69757:never left each other. That lasted for nine years and some months. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:69758:was like her own father, and she was my child. I do not know whether
tests/les_miserables.txt:69759:you understand, Monsieur Pontmercy, but to go away now, never to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:69761:would be hard. If you do not disapprove of it, I will come to see
tests/les_miserables.txt:69762:Cosette from time to time. I will not come often. I will not remain
tests/les_miserables.txt:69763:long. You shall give orders that I am to be received in the little
tests/les_miserables.txt:69764:waiting-room. On the ground floor. I could enter perfectly well by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69765:back door, but that might create surprise perhaps, and it would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:69768:Put yourself in my place, I have nothing left but that. And then, we
tests/les_miserables.txt:69769:must be cautious. If I no longer come at all, it would produce a bad
tests/les_miserables.txt:69770:effect, it would be considered singular. What I can do, by the way, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:69771:to come in the afternoon, when night is beginning to fall.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:69774:“You shall come every evening,” said Marius, “and Cosette will be
tests/les_miserables.txt:69780:Marius saluted Jean Valjean, happiness escorted despair to the door,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69791:The sort of estrangement which he had always felt towards the man
tests/les_miserables.txt:69793:something enigmatic about that person, of which his instinct had warned
tests/les_miserables.txt:69796:This enigma was the most hideous of disgraces, the galleys. This M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69797:Fauchelevent was the convict Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69799:To abruptly find such a secret in the midst of one’s happiness
tests/les_miserables.txt:69800:resembles the discovery of a scorpion in a nest of turtledoves.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69802:Was the happiness of Marius and Cosette thenceforth condemned to such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69803:neighborhood? Was this an accomplished fact? Did the acceptance of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:69804:man form a part of the marriage now consummated? Was there nothing to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69807:Had Marius wedded the convict as well?
tests/les_miserables.txt:69809:In vain may one be crowned with light and joy, in vain may one taste
tests/les_miserables.txt:69810:the grand purple hour of life, happy love, such shocks would force even
tests/les_miserables.txt:69811:the archangel in his ecstasy, even the demigod in his glory, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69814:As is always the case in changes of view of this nature, Marius asked
tests/les_miserables.txt:69815:himself whether he had nothing with which to reproach himself. Had he
tests/les_miserables.txt:69816:been wanting in divination? Had he been wanting in prudence? Had he
tests/les_miserables.txt:69818:this love affair, which had ended in his marriage to Cosette, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:69819:taking sufficient precautions to throw light upon the surroundings? He
tests/les_miserables.txt:69820:admitted,—it is thus, by a series of successive admissions of ourselves
tests/les_miserables.txt:69822:admitted the chimerical and visionary side of his nature, a sort of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69823:internal cloud peculiar to many organizations, and which, in paroxysms
tests/les_miserables.txt:69824:of passion and sorrow, dilates as the temperature of the soul changes,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69825:and invades the entire man, to such a degree as to render him nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:69826:more than a conscience bathed in a mist. We have more than once
tests/les_miserables.txt:69827:indicated this characteristic element of Marius’ individuality.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69829:He recalled that, in the intoxication of his love, in the Rue Plumet,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69830:during those six or seven ecstatic weeks, he had not even spoken to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69831:Cosette of that drama in the Gorbeau hovel, where the victim had taken
tests/les_miserables.txt:69832:up such a singular line of silence during the struggle and the ensuing
tests/les_miserables.txt:69834:Yet it was so near and so terrible! How had it come to pass that he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:69835:not even named the Thénardiers, and, particularly, on the day when he
tests/les_miserables.txt:69836:had encountered Éponine? He now found it almost difficult to explain
tests/les_miserables.txt:69837:his silence of that time. Nevertheless, he could account for it. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:69838:recalled his benumbed state, his intoxication with Cosette, love
tests/les_miserables.txt:69839:absorbing everything, that catching away of each other into the ideal,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69840:and perhaps also, like the imperceptible quantity of reason mingled
tests/les_miserables.txt:69841:with this violent and charming state of the soul, a vague, dull
tests/les_miserables.txt:69842:instinct impelling him to conceal and abolish in his memory that
tests/les_miserables.txt:69843:redoubtable adventure, contact with which he dreaded, in which he did
tests/les_miserables.txt:69844:not wish to play any part, his agency in which he had kept secret, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:69845:in which he could be neither narrator nor witness without being an
tests/les_miserables.txt:69846:accuser.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69849:no time for anything except love.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69852:mind, examined everything, whatever might have been the consequences if
tests/les_miserables.txt:69853:he had told Cosette about the Gorbeau ambush, even if he had discovered
tests/les_miserables.txt:69854:that Jean Valjean was a convict, would that have changed him, Marius?
tests/les_miserables.txt:69855:Would that have changed her, Cosette? Would he have drawn back? Would
tests/les_miserables.txt:69857:her? No. Then there was nothing to regret, nothing with which he need
tests/les_miserables.txt:69858:reproach himself. All was well. There is a deity for those drunken men
tests/les_miserables.txt:69859:who are called lovers. Marius blind, had followed the path which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:69860:would have chosen had he been in full possession of his sight. Love had
tests/les_miserables.txt:69863:But this paradise was henceforth complicated with an infernal
tests/les_miserables.txt:69864:accompaniment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69866:Marius’ ancient estrangement towards this man, towards this
tests/les_miserables.txt:69867:Fauchelevent who had turned into Jean Valjean, was at present mingled
tests/les_miserables.txt:69870:In this horror, let us state, there was some pity, and even a certain
tests/les_miserables.txt:69873:This thief, this thief guilty of a second offence, had restored that
tests/les_miserables.txt:69874:deposit. And what a deposit! Six hundred thousand francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69876:He alone was in the secret of that deposit. He might have kept it all,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69879:Moreover, he had himself revealed his situation. Nothing forced him to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69881:avowal there was something more than acceptance of humiliation, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:69882:was acceptance of peril. For a condemned man, a mask is not a mask, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:69883:is a shelter. A false name is security, and he had rejected that false
tests/les_miserables.txt:69886:Through a conscientious scruple. He himself explained this with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69887:irresistible accents of truth. In short, whatever this Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:69888:might be, he was, undoubtedly, a conscience which was awakening. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:69889:existed some mysterious re-habilitation which had begun; and, to all
tests/les_miserables.txt:69890:appearances, scruples had for a long time already controlled this man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69891:Such fits of justice and goodness are not characteristic of vulgar
tests/les_miserables.txt:69892:natures. An awakening of conscience is grandeur of soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69894:Jean Valjean was sincere. This sincerity, visible, palpable,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69895:irrefragable, evident from the very grief that it caused him, rendered
tests/les_miserables.txt:69896:inquiries useless, and conferred authority on all that that man had
tests/les_miserables.txt:69900:breathed from M. Fauchelevent? distrust. What did Jean Valjean inspire?
tests/les_miserables.txt:69901:confidence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69903:In the mysterious balance of this Jean Valjean which the pensive Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:69904:struck, he admitted the active principle, he admitted the passive
tests/les_miserables.txt:69905:principle, and he tried to reach a balance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69908:clear idea of this man, and while pursuing Jean Valjean, so to speak,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69912:The deposit honestly restored, the probity of the confession—these were
tests/les_miserables.txt:69913:good. This produced a lightening of the cloud, then the cloud became
tests/les_miserables.txt:69914:black once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69918:After all, what was that adventure in the Jondrette attic? Why had that
tests/les_miserables.txt:69919:man taken to flight on the arrival of the police, instead of entering a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69920:complaint?
tests/les_miserables.txt:69922:Here Marius found the answer. Because that man was a fugitive from
tests/les_miserables.txt:69923:justice, who had broken his ban.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69925:Another question: Why had that man come to the barricade?
tests/les_miserables.txt:69927:For Marius now once more distinctly beheld that recollection which had
tests/les_miserables.txt:69928:reappeared in his emotions like sympathetic ink at the application of
tests/les_miserables.txt:69929:heat. This man had been in the barricade. He had not fought there. What
tests/les_miserables.txt:69930:had he come there for? In the presence of this question a spectre
tests/les_miserables.txt:69934:Marius recalled perfectly now that funereal sight of Jean Valjean
tests/les_miserables.txt:69935:dragging the pinioned Javert out of the barricade, and he still heard
tests/les_miserables.txt:69936:behind the corner of the little Rue Mondétour that frightful pistol
tests/les_miserables.txt:69937:shot. Obviously, there was hatred between that police spy and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69939:the barricade for the purpose of revenging himself. He had arrived
tests/les_miserables.txt:69940:late. He probably knew that Javert was a prisoner there. The Corsican
tests/les_miserables.txt:69941:vendetta has penetrated to certain lower strata and has become the law
tests/les_miserables.txt:69942:there; it is so simple that it does not astonish souls which are but
tests/les_miserables.txt:69943:half turned towards good; and those hearts are so constituted that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69944:criminal, who is in the path of repentance, may be scrupulous in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69945:matter of theft and unscrupulous in the matter of vengeance. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:69949:reply. This question Marius felt like pincers. How had it come to pass
tests/les_miserables.txt:69950:that Jean Valjean’s existence had elbowed that of Cosette for so long a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69953:What melancholy sport of Providence was that which had placed that
tests/les_miserables.txt:69954:child in contact with that man? Are there then chains for two which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:69955:forged on high? and does God take pleasure in coupling the angel with
tests/les_miserables.txt:69956:the demon? So a crime and an innocence can be room-mates in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69957:mysterious galleys of wretchedness? In that defiling of condemned
tests/les_miserables.txt:69958:persons which is called human destiny, can two brows pass side by side,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69961:an eternal lightning? Who could have arranged that inexplicable pairing
tests/les_miserables.txt:69962:off? In what manner, in consequence of what prodigy, had any community
tests/les_miserables.txt:69963:of life been established between this celestial little creature and
tests/les_miserables.txt:69964:that old criminal?
tests/les_miserables.txt:69966:Who could have bound the lamb to the wolf, and, what was still more
tests/les_miserables.txt:69967:incomprehensible, have attached the wolf to the lamb? For the wolf
tests/les_miserables.txt:69968:loved the lamb, for the fierce creature adored the feeble one, for,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69969:during the space of nine years, the angel had had the monster as her
tests/les_miserables.txt:69970:point of support. Cosette’s childhood and girlhood, her advent in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:69974:abysses, and Marius could no longer bend over Jean Valjean without
tests/les_miserables.txt:69975:becoming dizzy. What was this man-precipice?
tests/les_miserables.txt:69977:The old symbols of Genesis are eternal; in human society, such as it
tests/les_miserables.txt:69978:now exists, and until a broader day shall effect a change in it, there
tests/les_miserables.txt:69980:one which is according to good is Abel; the other which is according to
tests/les_miserables.txt:69982:religiously absorbed in the adoration of a virgin, watching over her,
tests/les_miserables.txt:69986:What was that cesspool which had venerated that innocence to such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69988:educating Cosette? What was this figure of the shadows which had for
tests/les_miserables.txt:69989:its only object the preservation of the rising of a star from every
tests/les_miserables.txt:69990:shadow and from every cloud?
tests/les_miserables.txt:69992:That was Jean Valjean’s secret; that was also God’s secret.
tests/les_miserables.txt:69994:In the presence of this double secret, Marius recoiled. The one, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:69997:the tool which he wills. He is not responsible to men. Do we know how
tests/les_miserables.txt:69999:to some extent, made that soul. That was incontestable. Well, what
tests/les_miserables.txt:70001:produces his miracles as seems good to him. He had constructed that
tests/les_miserables.txt:70002:charming Cosette, and he had employed Jean Valjean. It had pleased him
tests/les_miserables.txt:70003:to choose this strange collaborator for himself. What account have we
tests/les_miserables.txt:70005:the spring to create the rose?
tests/les_miserables.txt:70007:Marius made himself these replies, and declared to himself that they
tests/les_miserables.txt:70009:which we have just indicated, but he did not confess to himself that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70011:was splendidly pure. That was sufficient for him. What enlightenment
tests/les_miserables.txt:70013:had everything; what more could he desire? All,—is not that enough?
tests/les_miserables.txt:70014:Jean Valjean’s personal affairs did not concern him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70016:And bending over the fatal shadow of that man, he clung fast,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70017:convulsively, to the solemn declaration of that unhappy wretch: “I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:70019:existence.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70025:Henceforth, there remained Marius to fulfil the part of Providence to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70027:lover, her husband, her celestial male. Cosette, as she took her
tests/les_miserables.txt:70029:hideous and empty chrysalis, Jean Valjean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70031:In whatever circle of ideas Marius revolved, he always returned to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70032:certain horror for Jean Valjean. A sacred horror, perhaps, for, as we
tests/les_miserables.txt:70034:what he would, and seek what extenuation he would, he was certainly
tests/les_miserables.txt:70035:forced to fall back upon this: the man was a convict; that is to say, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70036:being who has not even a place in the social ladder, since he is lower
tests/les_miserables.txt:70037:than the very lowest rung. After the very last of men comes the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70038:convict. The convict is no longer, so to speak, in the semblance of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70040:which it can deprive a man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70043:he was a democrat and he entertained all the ideas of the law on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70044:subject of those whom the law strikes. He had not yet accomplished all
tests/les_miserables.txt:70045:progress, we admit. He had not yet come to distinguish between that
tests/les_miserables.txt:70046:which is written by man and that which is written by God, between law
tests/les_miserables.txt:70047:and right. He had not examined and weighed the right which man takes to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70048:dispose of the irrevocable and the irreparable. He was not shocked by
tests/les_miserables.txt:70049:the word _vindicte_. He found it quite simple that certain breaches of
tests/les_miserables.txt:70051:accepted, as the process of civilization, social damnation. He still
tests/les_miserables.txt:70052:stood at this point, though safe to advance infallibly later on, since
tests/les_miserables.txt:70056:repulsive. He was a man reproved, he was the convict. That word was for
tests/les_miserables.txt:70058:having reflected upon Jean Valjean for a long time, his final gesture
tests/les_miserables.txt:70061:Marius, if we must recognize and even insist upon the fact, while
tests/les_miserables.txt:70062:interrogating Jean Valjean to such a point that Jean Valjean had said:
tests/les_miserables.txt:70063:“You are confessing me,” had not, nevertheless, put to him two or three
tests/les_miserables.txt:70064:decisive questions.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70067:he had been afraid of them. The Jondrette attic? The barricade? Javert?
tests/les_miserables.txt:70069:not seem like a man who would draw back, and who knows whether Marius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70071:back?
tests/les_miserables.txt:70073:Has it not happened to all of us, in certain supreme conjunctures, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70075:asked a question? It is especially when one loves that one gives way to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70076:these exhibitions of cowardice. It is not wise to question sinister
tests/les_miserables.txt:70077:situations to the last point, particularly when the indissoluble side
tests/les_miserables.txt:70079:might have proceeded from the despairing explanations of Jean Valjean,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70083:lightning-flash is of the thunder also. Fatality has points of juncture
tests/les_miserables.txt:70084:where innocence itself is stamped with crime by the gloomy law of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70085:reflections which give color. The purest figures may forever preserve
tests/les_miserables.txt:70086:the reflection of a horrible association. Rightly or wrongly, Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:70087:had been afraid. He already knew too much. He sought to dull his senses
tests/les_miserables.txt:70095:the shadow. Who knows what its reply will be? The dawn may be blackened
tests/les_miserables.txt:70098:In this state of mind the thought that that man would, henceforth, come
tests/les_miserables.txt:70099:into any contact whatever with Cosette was a heartrending perplexity to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70102:He now almost reproached himself for not having put those formidable
tests/les_miserables.txt:70103:questions, before which he had recoiled, and from which an implacable
tests/les_miserables.txt:70104:and definitive decision might have sprung. He felt that he was too
tests/les_miserables.txt:70106:led him to an imprudent concession. He had allowed himself to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:70107:touched. He had been in the wrong. He ought to have simply and purely
tests/les_miserables.txt:70108:rejected Jean Valjean. Jean Valjean played the part of fire, and that
tests/les_miserables.txt:70112:which had deafened, blinded, and carried him away. He was displeased
tests/les_miserables.txt:70117:man want? Here, he became dismayed, he did not wish to dig down, he did
tests/les_miserables.txt:70120:Valjean held his promise; one must keep one’s word even to a convict,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70121:above all to a convict. Still, his first duty was to Cosette. In short,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70122:he was carried away by the repugnance which dominated him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70124:Marius turned over all this confusion of ideas in his mind, passing
tests/les_miserables.txt:70125:from one to the other, and moved by all of them. Hence arose a profound
tests/les_miserables.txt:70129:a talent, and Marius succeeded in doing it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70131:However, without any apparent object, he questioned Cosette, who was as
tests/les_miserables.txt:70132:candid as a dove is white and who suspected nothing; he talked of her
tests/les_miserables.txt:70133:childhood and her youth, and he became more and more convinced that
tests/les_miserables.txt:70134:that convict had been everything good, paternal and respectable that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70135:man can be towards Cosette. All that Marius had caught a glimpse of and
tests/les_miserables.txt:70136:had surmised was real. That sinister nettle had loved and protected
tests/les_miserables.txt:70147:[Illustration: The Twilight Decline]
tests/les_miserables.txt:70155:On the following day, at nightfall, Jean Valjean knocked at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70156:carriage gate of the Gillenormand house. It was Basque who received
tests/les_miserables.txt:70157:him. Basque was in the courtyard at the appointed hour, as though he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70158:had received his orders. It sometimes happens that one says to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70159:servant: “You will watch for Mr. So and So, when he arrives.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70163:approach him:
tests/les_miserables.txt:70165:“Monsieur le Baron has charged me to inquire whether monsieur desires
tests/les_miserables.txt:70171:Basque, who was perfectly respectful, opened the door of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70177:The room which Jean Valjean entered was a damp, vaulted room on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70178:ground floor, which served as a cellar on occasion, which opened on the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70182:This chamber was not one of those which are harassed by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70184:tranquilly there. Persecution of the spiders was not organized there. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:70185:fine web, which spread far and wide, and was very black and ornamented
tests/les_miserables.txt:70187:which was small and low-ceiled, was furnished with a heap of empty
tests/les_miserables.txt:70188:bottles piled up in one corner.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70190:The wall, which was daubed with an ochre yellow wash, was scaling off
tests/les_miserables.txt:70191:in large flakes. At one end there was a chimney-piece painted in black
tests/les_miserables.txt:70192:with a narrow shelf. A fire was burning there; which indicated that
tests/les_miserables.txt:70195:Two armchairs were placed at the two corners of the fireplace. Between
tests/les_miserables.txt:70196:the chairs an old bedside rug, which displayed more foundation thread
tests/les_miserables.txt:70197:than wool, had been spread by way of a carpet.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70199:The chamber was lighted by the fire on the hearth and the twilight
tests/les_miserables.txt:70203:threw himself into one of the armchairs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70205:Basque returned, set a lighted candle on the chimney-piece and retired.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70206:Jean Valjean, his head drooping and his chin resting on his breast,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70207:perceived neither Basque nor the candle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70209:All at once, he drew himself up with a start. Cosette was standing
tests/les_miserables.txt:70215:was contemplating with that profound gaze was not her beauty but her
tests/les_miserables.txt:70218:“Well,” exclaimed Cosette, “father, I knew that you were peculiar, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:70219:I never should have expected this. What an idea! Marius told me that
tests/les_miserables.txt:70220:you wish me to receive you here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70226:“I expected that reply. Good. I warn you that I am going to make a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70227:scene for you. Let us begin at the beginning. Embrace me, father.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70230:And she offered him her cheek.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70235:I pardon you. Jesus Christ said: Offer the other cheek. Here it is.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70238:And she presented her other cheek.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70243:“This is becoming serious,” said Cosette. “What have I done to you? I
tests/les_miserables.txt:70244:declare that I am perplexed. You owe me reparation. You will dine with
tests/les_miserables.txt:70251:“That is not true. I will get M. Gillenormand to scold you.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70259:Here Cosette lost ground a little. She ceased to command and passed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70262:“But why? and you choose the ugliest chamber in the house in which to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70269:Jean Valjean caught himself up.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70271:“You know, madame, that I am peculiar, I have my freaks.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70274:Cosette struck her tiny hands together.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70280:Jean Valjean directed upon her that heartrending smile to which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70281:occasionally had recourse:
tests/les_miserables.txt:70289:“Do not call me father.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70300:taken place? come, look me in the face. And you won’t live with us! And
tests/les_miserables.txt:70301:you won’t have my chamber! What have I done to you? Has anything
tests/les_miserables.txt:70314:“Why do you change your name?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70317:“You have changed yours, surely.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70322:“Since you are Madame Pontmercy, I certainly can be Monsieur Jean.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70325:“I don’t understand anything about it. All this is idiotic. I shall ask
tests/les_miserables.txt:70327:will not consent to it. You cause me a great deal of pain. One does
tests/les_miserables.txt:70328:have freaks, but one does not cause one’s little Cosette grief. That is
tests/les_miserables.txt:70329:wrong. You have no right to be wicked, you who are so good.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70334:She seized his hands with vivacity, and raising them to her face with
tests/les_miserables.txt:70335:an irresistible movement, she pressed them against her neck beneath her
tests/les_miserables.txt:70336:chin, which is a gesture of profound tenderness.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70343:“This is what I call being good: being nice and coming and living
tests/les_miserables.txt:70355:Cosette became angry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70358:things like that, which are not common sense!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70362:driven to seek authorities, and who clutches at every branch, “she
tests/les_miserables.txt:70364:of my own. There is nothing new in this. I always have loved my black
tests/les_miserables.txt:70365:corner.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70368:“But it is cold here. One cannot see distinctly. It is abominable, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:70372:“Just now, as I was coming hither,” replied Jean Valjean, “I saw a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70373:piece of furniture in the Rue Saint Louis. It was at a cabinet-maker’s.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70376:call rosewood, I think. It is inlaid. The mirror is quite large. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:70382:And with supreme grace, setting her teeth and drawing back her lips,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70383:she blew at Jean Valjean. She was a Grace copying a cat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70385:“I am furious,” she resumed. “Ever since yesterday, you have made me
tests/les_miserables.txt:70388:all alone. I arrange a chamber prettily. If I could have put the good
tests/les_miserables.txt:70389:God there I would have done it. My chamber is left on my hands. My
tests/les_miserables.txt:70390:lodger sends me into bankruptcy. I order a nice little dinner of
tests/les_miserables.txt:70391:Nicolette. We will have nothing to do with your dinner, Madame. And my
tests/les_miserables.txt:70392:father Fauchelevent wants me to call him ‘Monsieur Jean,’ and to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70393:receive him in a frightful, old, ugly cellar, where the walls have
tests/les_miserables.txt:70394:beards, and where the crystal consists of empty bottles, and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70395:curtains are of spiders’ webs! You are singular, I admit, that is your
tests/les_miserables.txt:70396:style, but people who get married are granted a truce. You ought not to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70398:perfectly contented in your abominable Rue de l’Homme Armé. I was very
tests/les_miserables.txt:70399:desperate indeed there, that I was. What have you against me? You cause
tests/les_miserables.txt:70403:And, becoming suddenly serious, she gazed intently at Jean Valjean and
tests/les_miserables.txt:70406:“Are you angry with me because I am happy?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70409:Ingenuousness sometimes unconsciously penetrates deep. This question,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70410:which was simple for Cosette, was profound for Jean Valjean. Cosette
tests/les_miserables.txt:70411:had meant to scratch, and she lacerated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70418:“Her happiness was the object of my life. Now God may sign my
tests/les_miserables.txt:70422:“Ah, you have said _thou_ to me!” exclaimed Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70424:And she sprang to his neck.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70427:almost seemed to him as though he were taking her back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70431:This enthusiastic impulse was on the point of becoming poignant for
tests/les_miserables.txt:70446:enigmatical farewell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70454:On the following day, at the same hour, Jean Valjean came.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70457:exclaimed that she was cold, no longer spoke of the drawing-room, she
tests/les_miserables.txt:70459:to be addressed as _you_. She allowed herself to be called Madame.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70460:Only, her joy had undergone a certain diminution. She would have been
tests/les_miserables.txt:70463:It is probable that she had had with Marius one of those conversations
tests/les_miserables.txt:70464:in which the beloved man says what he pleases, explains nothing, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:70465:satisfies the beloved woman. The curiosity of lovers does not extend
tests/les_miserables.txt:70469:bottles, and Nicolette the spiders.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70471:All the days which followed brought Jean Valjean at the same hour. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:70472:came every day, because he had not the strength to take Marius’ words
tests/les_miserables.txt:70474:the hours when Jean Valjean came. The house grew accustomed to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70475:novel ways of M. Fauchelevent. Toussaint helped in this direction:
tests/les_miserables.txt:70477:issued this decree:—“He’s an original.” And all was said. Moreover, at
tests/les_miserables.txt:70479:juxtaposition; a newcomer is in the way. There is no longer any room;
tests/les_miserables.txt:70480:all habits are acquired. M. Fauchelevent, M. Tranchelevent, Father
tests/les_miserables.txt:70482:gentleman.” He added:—“Nothing is more common than those originals.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70484:Canaples was still worse. He bought a palace that he might lodge in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70485:garret. These are fantastic appearances that people affect.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70488:No one caught a glimpse of the sinister foundation. And moreover, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:70489:could have guessed such a thing? There are marshes of this description
tests/les_miserables.txt:70490:in India. The water seems extraordinary, inexplicable, rippling though
tests/les_miserables.txt:70491:there is no wind, and agitated where it should be calm. One gazes at
tests/les_miserables.txt:70492:the surface of these causeless ebullitions; one does not perceive the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70493:hydra which crawls on the bottom.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70495:Many men have a secret monster in this same manner, a dragon which
tests/les_miserables.txt:70496:gnaws them, a despair which inhabits their night. Such a man resembles
tests/les_miserables.txt:70497:other men, he goes and comes. No one knows that he bears within him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70498:frightful parasitic pain with a thousand teeth, which lives within the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70499:unhappy man, and of which he is dying. No one knows that this man is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70500:gulf. He is stagnant but deep. From time to time, a trouble of which
tests/les_miserables.txt:70501:the onlooker understands nothing appears on his surface. A mysterious
tests/les_miserables.txt:70506:taking their leave, keeping in the background when other people are
tests/les_miserables.txt:70507:displaying themselves, preserving on all occasions what may be
tests/les_miserables.txt:70508:designated as the wall-colored mantle, seeking the solitary walk,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70509:preferring the deserted street, avoiding any share in conversation,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70510:avoiding crowds and festivals, seeming at one’s ease and living poorly,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70511:having one’s key in one’s pocket, and one’s candle at the porter’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:70512:lodge, however rich one may be, entering by the side door, ascending
tests/les_miserables.txt:70513:the private staircase,—all these insignificant singularities, fugitive
tests/les_miserables.txt:70514:folds on the surface, often proceed from a formidable foundation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70517:of Cosette: the relations which marriage creates, visits, the care of
tests/les_miserables.txt:70519:costly, they consisted in one thing: being with Marius. The great
tests/les_miserables.txt:70520:occupation of her life was to go out with him, to remain with him. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:70522:face of the sun, in the open street, without hiding themselves, before
tests/les_miserables.txt:70523:the whole world, both of them completely alone.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70525:Cosette had one vexation. Toussaint could not get on with Nicolette,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70527:The grandfather was well; Marius argued a case here and there; Aunt
tests/les_miserables.txt:70528:Gillenormand peacefully led that life aside which sufficed for her,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70529:beside the new household. Jean Valjean came every day.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70532:“Monsieur Jean,” rendered him another person to Cosette. The care which
tests/les_miserables.txt:70533:he had himself taken to detach her from him was succeeding. She became
tests/les_miserables.txt:70535:sincerely, and he felt it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70538:longer my father, you were my uncle, you are no longer my uncle, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:70539:were Monsieur Fauchelevent, you are Jean. Who are you then? I don’t
tests/les_miserables.txt:70544:He still lived in the Rue de l’Homme Armé, because he could not make up
tests/les_miserables.txt:70545:his mind to remove to a distance from the quarter where Cosette dwelt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70550:Little by little he acquired the habit of making his visits less brief.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70552:of the days which were lengthening, he arrived earlier and departed
tests/les_miserables.txt:70555:One day Cosette chanced to say “father” to him. A flash of joy
tests/les_miserables.txt:70556:illuminated Jean Valjean’s melancholy old countenance. He caught her
tests/les_miserables.txt:70567:This was the last time. After that last flash of light, complete
tests/les_miserables.txt:70568:extinction ensued. No more familiarity, no more good-morning with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70570:his own request and through his own complicity driven out of all his
tests/les_miserables.txt:70575:The eye eventually becomes accustomed to the light of a cellar. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:70576:short, it sufficed for him to have an apparition of Cosette every day.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70577:His whole life was concentrated in that one hour.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70579:He seated himself close to her, he gazed at her in silence, or he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70580:talked to her of years gone by, of her childhood, of the convent, of
tests/les_miserables.txt:70584:and fresh, the moment of the sun’s great gayety, the gardens which
tests/les_miserables.txt:70587:of gillyflowers spread over the ancient walls, snapdragons yawned
tests/les_miserables.txt:70588:through the crevices of the stones, amid the grass there was a charming
tests/les_miserables.txt:70589:beginning of daisies, and buttercups, the white butterflies of the year
tests/les_miserables.txt:70590:were making their first appearance, the wind, that minstrel of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70592:auroral symphony which the old poets called the springtide,—Marius said
tests/les_miserables.txt:70593:to Cosette:—“We said that we would go back to take a look at our garden
tests/les_miserables.txt:70596:the Rue Plumet produced on them the effect of the dawn. They already
tests/les_miserables.txt:70597:had behind them in life something which was like the springtime of
tests/les_miserables.txt:70601:evening, at the usual hour, Jean Valjean came to the Rue des
tests/les_miserables.txt:70603:returned,” Basque said to him. He seated himself in silence, and waited
tests/les_miserables.txt:70606:Cosette was so intoxicated with her walk to “their garden,” and so
tests/les_miserables.txt:70608:nothing else on the morrow. She did not notice that she had not seen
tests/les_miserables.txt:70620:“In a hackney carriage.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70623:For some time, Jean Valjean had noticed the economical life led by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70624:young people. He was troubled by it. Marius’ economy was severe, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:70628:“Why do you not have a carriage of your own? A pretty coupé would only
tests/les_miserables.txt:70629:cost you five hundred francs a month. You are rich.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70635:not replaced her. Why?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70638:“Nicolette suffices.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70647:“You ought to have a house of your own, your own servants, a carriage,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70649:by your riches? Wealth adds to happiness.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70655:heart which is slipping, one does not halt on the downward slope.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70657:When Jean Valjean wished to prolong his visit and to induce
tests/les_miserables.txt:70658:forgetfulness of the hour, he sang the praises of Marius; he pronounced
tests/les_miserables.txt:70659:him handsome, noble, courageous, witty, eloquent, good. Cosette outdid
tests/les_miserables.txt:70661:was inexhaustible; those six letters contained volumes. In this manner,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70662:Jean Valjean contrived to remain a long time.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70665:his wounds. It frequently happened that Basque came twice to announce:
tests/les_miserables.txt:70672:Was there, then, any truth in that comparison of the chrysalis which
tests/les_miserables.txt:70674:chrysalis who would persist, and who would come to visit his butterfly?
tests/les_miserables.txt:70678:fire.”—And he furnished the explanation for himself.—“It is perfectly
tests/les_miserables.txt:70679:simple. It is April. The cold weather has ceased.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70682:“Heavens! how cold it is here!” exclaimed Cosette when she entered.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70689:“Yes, since we are now in the month of May.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70693:cellar.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70696:“I thought that a fire was unnecessary.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70699:“That is exactly like one of your ideas!” retorted Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70701:On the following day there was a fire. But the two armchairs were
tests/les_miserables.txt:70705:He went for the armchairs and restored them to their ordinary place
tests/les_miserables.txt:70708:This fire lighted once more encouraged him, however. He prolonged the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70709:conversation even beyond its customary limits. As he rose to take his
tests/les_miserables.txt:70718:“He said to me: ‘Cosette, we have an income of thirty thousand livres.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70720:replied: ‘That makes thirty.’ He went on: ‘Would you have the courage
tests/les_miserables.txt:70726:Jean Valjean found not a word to answer. Cosette probably expected some
tests/les_miserables.txt:70727:explanation from him; he listened in gloomy silence. He went back to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70730:dwelling. It was only after having ascended nearly two stories that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70731:perceived his error and went down again.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70733:His mind was swarming with conjectures. It was evident that Marius had
tests/les_miserables.txt:70734:his doubts as to the origin of the six hundred thousand francs, that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70735:feared some source that was not pure, who knows? that he had even,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70736:perhaps, discovered that the money came from him, Jean Valjean, that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70737:hesitated before this suspicious fortune, and was disinclined to take
tests/les_miserables.txt:70739:rather than that they should be rich with wealth that was not clean.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70744:On the following day, he underwent something like a shock on entering
tests/les_miserables.txt:70745:the ground-floor room. The armchairs had disappeared. There was not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70746:single chair of any sort.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70748:“Ah, what’s this!” exclaimed Cosette as she entered, “no chairs! Where
tests/les_miserables.txt:70749:are the armchairs?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70754:“This is too much!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70771:“I think that Basque needed the chairs for the drawing-room.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70777:“You have company this evening, no doubt.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70780:“We expect no one.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:70787:“To have the chairs carried off! The other day you had the fire put
tests/les_miserables.txt:70801:On the following day he did not come. Cosette only observed the fact in
tests/les_miserables.txt:70807:And she felt a slight twinge at her heart, but she hardly perceived it,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70810:On the following day he did not come.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70814:happy! She speedily despatched Nicolette to M. Jean’s house to inquire
tests/les_miserables.txt:70815:whether he were ill, and why he had not come on the previous evening.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70816:Nicolette brought back the reply of M. Jean that he was not ill. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:70817:busy. He would come soon. As soon as he was able. Moreover, he was on
tests/les_miserables.txt:70819:his custom to take trips from time to time. They were not to worry
tests/les_miserables.txt:70822:Nicolette on entering M. Jean’s had repeated to him her mistress’ very
tests/les_miserables.txt:70823:words. That Madame had sent her to inquire why M. Jean had not come on
tests/les_miserables.txt:70824:the preceding evening. ”—It is two days since I have been there,” said
tests/les_miserables.txt:70827:But the remark passed unnoticed by Nicolette, who did not report it to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70838:loungers on thresholds, noticed an old man neatly clad in black, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:70841:passed in front of the Blancs Manteaux, gained the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:70842:Culture-Sainte-Catherine, and, on arriving at the Rue de l’Écharpe,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70845:There he walked at a slow pace, with his head strained forward, seeing
tests/les_miserables.txt:70846:nothing, hearing nothing, his eye immovably fixed on a point which
tests/les_miserables.txt:70847:seemed to be a star to him, which never varied, and which was no other
tests/les_miserables.txt:70848:than the corner of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire. The nearer he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70849:approached the corner of the street the more his eye lighted up; a sort
tests/les_miserables.txt:70851:fascinated and much affected air, his lips indulged in obscure
tests/les_miserables.txt:70853:he smiled vaguely and advanced as slowly as possible. One would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:70854:said that, while desirous of reaching his destination, he feared the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70855:moment when he should be close at hand. When only a few houses remained
tests/les_miserables.txt:70856:between him and that street which appeared to attract him his pace
tests/les_miserables.txt:70857:slackened, to such a degree that, at times, one might have thought that
tests/les_miserables.txt:70858:he was no longer advancing at all. The vacillation of his head and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70859:fixity of his eyeballs suggested the thought of the magnetic needle
tests/les_miserables.txt:70861:arrive at last; he reached the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire; then he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70862:halted, he trembled, he thrust his head with a sort of melancholy
tests/les_miserables.txt:70863:timidity round the corner of the last house, and gazed into that
tests/les_miserables.txt:70864:street, and there was in that tragic look something which resembled the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70865:dazzling light of the impossible, and the reflection from a paradise
tests/les_miserables.txt:70866:that was closed to him. Then a tear, which had slowly gathered in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70867:corner of his lids, and had become large enough to fall, trickled down
tests/les_miserables.txt:70868:his cheek, and sometimes stopped at his mouth. The old man tasted its
tests/les_miserables.txt:70871:in proportion as he retreated, his glance died out.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70873:Little by little, this old man ceased to go as far as the corner of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70877:One day he stopped at the corner of the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine
tests/les_miserables.txt:70878:and looked at the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire from a distance. Then he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70880:something, and retraced his steps.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70882:Soon he no longer came as far as the Rue Saint-Louis. He got as far as
tests/les_miserables.txt:70883:the Rue Pavée, shook his head and turned back; then he went no further
tests/les_miserables.txt:70885:Blancs-Manteaux. One would have said that he was a pendulum which was
tests/les_miserables.txt:70886:no longer wound up, and whose oscillations were growing shorter before
tests/les_miserables.txt:70887:ceasing altogether.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70890:same trip, but he no longer completed it, and, perhaps without himself
tests/les_miserables.txt:70891:being aware of the fact, he constantly shortened it. His whole
tests/les_miserables.txt:70892:countenance expressed this single idea: What is the use?—His eye was
tests/les_miserables.txt:70893:dim; no more radiance. His tears were also exhausted; they no longer
tests/les_miserables.txt:70894:collected in the corner of his eye-lid; that thoughtful eye was dry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70895:The old man’s head was still craned forward; his chin moved at times;
tests/les_miserables.txt:70896:the folds in his gaunt neck were painful to behold. Sometimes, when the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70900:The good women of the quarter said: “He is an innocent.” The children
tests/les_miserables.txt:70914:It is a terrible thing to be happy! How content one is! How
tests/les_miserables.txt:70915:all-sufficient one finds it! How, being in possession of the false
tests/les_miserables.txt:70916:object of life, happiness, one forgets the true object, duty!
tests/les_miserables.txt:70922:to M. Fauchelevent, and, since that time, he had feared to put any to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70923:Jean Valjean. He had regretted the promise into which he had allowed
tests/les_miserables.txt:70925:wrong in making that concession to despair. He had confined himself to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70926:gradually estranging Jean Valjean from his house and to effacing him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70927:as much as possible, from Cosette’s mind. He had, in a manner, always
tests/les_miserables.txt:70928:placed himself between Cosette and Jean Valjean, sure that, in this
tests/les_miserables.txt:70929:way, she would not perceive nor think of the latter. It was more than
tests/les_miserables.txt:70930:effacement, it was an eclipse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70932:Marius did what he considered necessary and just. He thought that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70933:had serious reasons which the reader has already seen, and others which
tests/les_miserables.txt:70937:Chance having ordained that he should encounter, in a case which he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:70939:acquired mysterious information, without seeking it, which he had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:70940:been able, it is true, to probe, out of respect for the secret which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70941:had promised to guard, and out of consideration for Jean Valjean’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:70943:to perform: the restitution of the six hundred thousand francs to some
tests/les_miserables.txt:70944:one whom he sought with all possible discretion. In the meanwhile, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:70945:abstained from touching that money.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70947:As for Cosette, she had not been initiated into any of these secrets;
tests/les_miserables.txt:70948:but it would be harsh to condemn her also.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70950:There existed between Marius and her an all-powerful magnetism, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:70951:caused her to do, instinctively and almost mechanically, what Marius
tests/les_miserables.txt:70952:wished. She was conscious of Marius’ will in the direction of “Monsieur
tests/les_miserables.txt:70953:Jean,” she conformed to it. Her husband had not been obliged to say
tests/les_miserables.txt:70954:anything to her; she yielded to the vague but clear pressure of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:70955:tacit intentions, and obeyed blindly. Her obedience in this instance
tests/les_miserables.txt:70956:consisted in not remembering what Marius forgot. She was not obliged to
tests/les_miserables.txt:70957:make any effort to accomplish this. Without her knowing why herself,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70958:and without his having any cause to accuse her of it, her soul had
tests/les_miserables.txt:70959:become so wholly her husband’s that that which was shrouded in gloom in
tests/les_miserables.txt:70960:Marius’ mind became overcast in hers.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70962:Let us not go too far, however; in what concerns Jean Valjean, this
tests/les_miserables.txt:70963:forgetfulness and obliteration were merely superficial. She was rather
tests/les_miserables.txt:70964:heedless than forgetful. At bottom, she was sincerely attached to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70965:man whom she had so long called her father; but she loved her husband
tests/les_miserables.txt:70966:still more dearly. This was what had somewhat disturbed the balance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:70967:her heart, which leaned to one side only.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70970:her surprise. Then Marius calmed her: “He is absent, I think. Did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:70973:so long.” Two or three times she despatched Nicolette to inquire in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70975:Valjean caused the answer “no” to be given.
tests/les_miserables.txt:70977:Cosette asked nothing more, since she had but one need on earth,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70987:Moreover that which is called, far too harshly in certain cases, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:70988:ingratitude of children, is not always a thing so deserving of reproach
tests/les_miserables.txt:70993:towards the light. Hence a gulf which is fatal on the part of the old,
tests/les_miserables.txt:70994:and involuntary on the part of the young. This breach, at first
tests/les_miserables.txt:70995:insensible, increases slowly, like all separations of branches. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:70996:boughs, without becoming detached from the trunk, grow away from it. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:70999:each other, but there is no longer a close connection. Young people
tests/les_miserables.txt:71000:feel the cooling off of life; old people, that of the tomb. Let us not
tests/les_miserables.txt:71001:blame these poor children.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71009:One day, Jean Valjean descended his staircase, took three steps in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71011:Gavroche had found him meditating on the night between the 5th and the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71013:This was the last oscillation of the pendulum. On the following day he
tests/les_miserables.txt:71017:His portress, who prepared his scanty repasts, a few cabbages or
tests/les_miserables.txt:71018:potatoes with bacon, glanced at the brown earthenware plate and
tests/les_miserables.txt:71019:exclaimed:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71039:“That is called thirst, and, when one does not eat at the same time, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:71040:is called fever.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71047:to-morrow’? The idea of leaving my platter without even touching it! My
tests/les_miserables.txt:71053:“I promise you that I will eat them,” he said, in his benevolent voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71057:Jean Valjean saw no other human creature than this good woman. There
tests/les_miserables.txt:71058:are streets in Paris through which no one ever passes, and houses to
tests/les_miserables.txt:71059:which no one ever comes. He was in one of those streets and one of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71062:While he still went out, he had purchased of a coppersmith, for a few
tests/les_miserables.txt:71063:sous, a little copper crucifix which he had hung up on a nail opposite
tests/les_miserables.txt:71075:“If he’s rich, let him have a doctor. If he is not rich, let him go
tests/les_miserables.txt:71076:without. If he has no doctor he will die.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71084:The portress set to scraping away the grass from what she called her
tests/les_miserables.txt:71088:“It’s a shame. Such a neat old man! He’s as white as a chicken.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71091:She caught sight of the doctor of the quarter as he passed the end of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71092:the street; she took it upon herself to request him to come upstairs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71094:“It’s on the second floor,” said she. “You have only to enter. As the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71095:good man no longer stirs from his bed, the door is always unlocked.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71098:The doctor saw Jean Valjean and spoke with him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71100:When he came down again the portress interrogated him:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71102:“Well, doctor?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71105:“Your sick man is very ill indeed.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71111:“Everything and nothing. He is a man who, to all appearances, has lost
tests/les_miserables.txt:71121:“Shall you come again, doctor?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71124:“Yes,” replied the doctor. “But some one else besides must come.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71134:One evening Jean Valjean found difficulty in raising himself on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71135:elbow; he felt of his wrist and could not find his pulse; his breath
tests/les_miserables.txt:71136:was short and halted at times; he recognized the fact that he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:71138:of some supreme preoccupation, he made an effort, drew himself up into
tests/les_miserables.txt:71140:clothes. As he no longer went out, he had returned to them and
tests/les_miserables.txt:71142:himself; merely putting his arms through his waistcoat made the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71143:perspiration trickle from his forehead.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71145:Since he had been alone, he had placed his bed in the antechamber, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:71152:The Bishop’s candlesticks were in their place on the chimney-piece. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:71153:took from a drawer two wax candles and put them in the candlesticks.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71155:them. In the same way candles are to be seen lighted in broad daylight
tests/les_miserables.txt:71156:in chambers where there is a corpse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71158:Every step that he took in going from one piece of furniture to another
tests/les_miserables.txt:71160:fatigue which expends the strength only to renew it; it was the remnant
tests/les_miserables.txt:71161:of all movement possible to him, it was life drained which flows away
tests/les_miserables.txt:71162:drop by drop in overwhelming efforts and which will never be renewed.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71164:The chair into which he allowed himself to fall was placed in front of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71165:that mirror, so fatal for him, so providential for Marius, in which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:71166:had read Cosette’s reversed writing on the blotting book. He caught
tests/les_miserables.txt:71167:sight of himself in this mirror, and did not recognize himself. He was
tests/les_miserables.txt:71169:taken for fifty; that year had counted for thirty. What he bore on his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71171:death. The hollowing of that pitiless nail could be felt there. His
tests/les_miserables.txt:71172:cheeks were pendulous; the skin of his face had the color which would
tests/les_miserables.txt:71173:lead one to think that it already had earth upon it; the corners of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71174:mouth drooped as in the mask which the ancients sculptured on tombs. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:71175:gazed into space with an air of reproach; one would have said that he
tests/les_miserables.txt:71176:was one of those grand tragic beings who have cause to complain of some
tests/les_miserables.txt:71179:He was in that condition, the last phase of dejection, in which sorrow
tests/les_miserables.txt:71180:no longer flows; it is coagulated, so to speak; there is something on
tests/les_miserables.txt:71181:the soul like a clot of despair.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71183:Night had come. He laboriously dragged a table and the old armchair to
tests/les_miserables.txt:71184:the fireside, and placed upon the table a pen, some ink and some paper.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71186:That done, he had a fainting fit. When he recovered consciousness, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:71187:was thirsty. As he could not lift the jug, he tipped it over painfully
tests/les_miserables.txt:71191:of the pen had curled up, the ink had dried away, he was forced to rise
tests/les_miserables.txt:71192:and put a few drops of water in the ink, which he did not accomplish
tests/les_miserables.txt:71194:compelled to write with the back of the pen. He wiped his brow from
tests/les_miserables.txt:71197:Then he turned towards the bed, and, still seated, for he could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:71198:stand, he gazed at the little black gown and all those beloved objects.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71200:These contemplations lasted for hours which seemed minutes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71202:All at once he shivered, he felt that a child was taking possession of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71203:him; he rested his elbows on the table, which was illuminated by the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71204:Bishop’s candles and took up the pen. His hand trembled. He wrote
tests/les_miserables.txt:71210:excellent. Love him well even after I am dead. Monsieur Pontmercy, love
tests/les_miserables.txt:71211:my darling child well. Cosette, this paper will be found; this is what
tests/les_miserables.txt:71213:strength to recall them, listen well, this money is really thine. Here
tests/les_miserables.txt:71214:is the whole matter: White jet comes from Norway, black jet comes from
tests/les_miserables.txt:71215:England, black glass jewellery comes from Germany. Jet is the lightest,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71216:the most precious, the most costly. Imitations can be made in France as
tests/les_miserables.txt:71217:well as in Germany. What is needed is a little anvil two inches square,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71219:formerly made with resin and lampblack, and cost four livres the pound.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71220:I invented a way of making it with gum shellac and turpentine. It does
tests/les_miserables.txt:71221:not cost more than thirty sous, and is much better. Buckles are made
tests/les_miserables.txt:71222:with a violet glass which is stuck fast, by means of this wax, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71223:little framework of black iron. The glass must be violet for iron
tests/les_miserables.txt:71224:jewellery, and black for gold jewellery. Spain buys a great deal of it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71225:It is the country of jet . . .”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71229:those sobs which at times welled up from the very depths of his being;
tests/les_miserables.txt:71230:the poor man clasped his head in both hands, and meditated.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71232:“Oh!” he exclaimed within himself [lamentable cries, heard by God
tests/les_miserables.txt:71233:alone], “all is over. I shall never see her more. She is a smile which
tests/les_miserables.txt:71235:her again. Oh! one minute, one instant, to hear her voice, to touch her
tests/les_miserables.txt:71240:My God! I shall never see her again!” At that moment there came a knock
tests/les_miserables.txt:71249:That same day, or to speak more accurately, that same evening, as
tests/les_miserables.txt:71251:study, having a case to look over, Basque handed him a letter saying:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71252:“The person who wrote the letter is in the antechamber.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71259:paper, coarsely folded—the very sight of certain missives is
tests/les_miserables.txt:71262:The letter which Basque had brought was of this sort.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71264:Marius took it. It smelled of tobacco. Nothing evokes a memory like an
tests/les_miserables.txt:71265:odor. Marius recognized that tobacco. He looked at the superscription:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71266:“To Monsieur, Monsieur le Baron Pommerci. At his hotel.” The
tests/les_miserables.txt:71267:recognition of the tobacco caused him to recognize the writing as well.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71273:whole world within him. This was certainly the paper, the fashion of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71274:folding, the dull tint of ink; it was certainly the well-known
tests/les_miserables.txt:71275:handwriting, especially was it the same tobacco.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71279:Thus, strange freak of chance! one of the two scents which he had so
tests/les_miserables.txt:71280:diligently sought, the one in connection with which he had lately again
tests/les_miserables.txt:71281:exerted so many efforts and which he supposed to be forever lost, had
tests/les_miserables.txt:71282:come and presented itself to him of its own accord.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71287:might have been baron Thénard, member of the Institute [acadenmy of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71288:ciences], but I am not.  I only bear the same as him, happy if this
tests/les_miserables.txt:71289:memory recommends me to the eccellence of your kindnesses. The benefit
tests/les_miserables.txt:71290:with which you will honor me will be reciprocle. I am in possession of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71291:a secret concerning an individual. This individual concerns you.  I
tests/les_miserables.txt:71292:hold the secret at your disposal desiring to have the honor to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:71295:madame la baronne being of lofty birth.  The sanctuary of virtue cannot
tests/les_miserables.txt:71296:cohabit longer with crime without abdicating.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71298:“I awate in the entichamber the orders of monsieur le baron.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71300:“With respect.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71308:Moreover, the rigmarole and the orthography completed the revelation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71309:The certificate of origin was complete.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71312:feeling of happiness. If he could now but find that other man of whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:71313:he was in search, the man who had saved him, Marius, there would be
tests/les_miserables.txt:71316:He opened the drawer of his secretary, took out several bank-notes, put
tests/les_miserables.txt:71317:them in his pocket, closed the secretary again, and rang the bell.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71322:Basque announced:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71332:This man, who was old, moreover, had a thick nose, his chin swathed in
tests/les_miserables.txt:71333:a cravat, green spectacles with a double screen of green taffeta over
tests/les_miserables.txt:71335:a level with his eyebrows like the wigs of English coachmen in “high
tests/les_miserables.txt:71336:life.” His hair was gray. He was dressed in black from head to foot, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:71337:garments that were very threadbare but clean; a bunch of seals
tests/les_miserables.txt:71338:depending from his fob suggested the idea of a watch. He held in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71339:hand an old hat! He walked in a bent attitude, and the curve in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71342:The first thing that struck the observer was, that this personage’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:71343:coat, which was too ample although carefully buttoned, had not been
tests/les_miserables.txt:71346:Here a short digression becomes necessary.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71348:There was in Paris at that epoch, in a low-lived old lodging in the Rue
tests/les_miserables.txt:71350:to change villains into honest men. Not for too long, which might have
tests/les_miserables.txt:71351:proved embarrassing for the villain. The change was on sight, for a day
tests/les_miserables.txt:71352:or two, at the rate of thirty sous a day, by means of a costume which
tests/les_miserables.txt:71354:This costumer was called “the Changer”; the pickpockets of Paris had
tests/les_miserables.txt:71356:complete wardrobe. The rags with which he tricked out people were
tests/les_miserables.txt:71357:almost probable. He had specialties and categories; on each nail of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71358:shop hung a social status, threadbare and worn; here the suit of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71360:in one corner the costume of a retired military man, elsewhere the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71364:This creature was the costumer of the immense drama which knavery plays
tests/les_miserables.txt:71365:in Paris. His lair was the green-room whence theft emerged, and into
tests/les_miserables.txt:71366:which roguery retreated. A tattered knave arrived at this
tests/les_miserables.txt:71367:dressing-room, deposited his thirty sous and selected, according to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71368:part which he wished to play, the costume which suited him, and on
tests/les_miserables.txt:71369:descending the stairs once more, the knave was a somebody. On the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71370:following day, the clothes were faithfully returned, and the Changer,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71372:one inconvenience about these clothes, they “did not fit”; not having
tests/les_miserables.txt:71375:pickpocket who exceeded or fell short of the human average was ill at
tests/les_miserables.txt:71376:his ease in the Changer’s costumes. It was necessary that one should
tests/les_miserables.txt:71378:ordinary men. He had taken the measure of the species from the first
tests/les_miserables.txt:71379:rascal who came to hand, who is neither stout nor thin, neither tall
tests/les_miserables.txt:71380:nor short. Hence adaptations which were sometimes difficult and from
tests/les_miserables.txt:71381:which the Changer’s clients extricated themselves as best they might.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71382:So much the worse for the exceptions! The suit of the statesman, for
tests/les_miserables.txt:71383:instance, black from head to foot, and consequently proper, would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:71384:been too large for Pitt and too small for Castelcicala. The costume of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71385:a statesman was designated as follows in the Changer’s catalogue; we
tests/les_miserables.txt:71386:copy:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71388:“A coat of black cloth, trowsers of black wool, a silk waistcoat, boots
tests/les_miserables.txt:71390:which we also copy: “In a separate box, a neatly frizzed peruke, green
tests/les_miserables.txt:71391:glasses, seals, and two small quills an inch long, wrapped in cotton.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71393:costume was, if we may so express ourselves, debilitated; the seams
tests/les_miserables.txt:71395:one of the coat buttons was missing on the breast; but this was only
tests/les_miserables.txt:71397:coat and laid upon his heart, its function was to conceal the absent
tests/les_miserables.txt:71400:If Marius had been familiar with the occult institutions of Paris, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:71401:would instantly have recognized upon the back of the visitor whom
tests/les_miserables.txt:71403:pick-me-down-that shop of the Changer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71406:expected to see turned to the newcomer’s disadvantage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71409:exaggerated bows, and demanded in a curt tone:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71414:The man replied with an amiable grin of which the caressing smile of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71415:crocodile will furnish some idea:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71418:of seeing Monsieur le Baron in society. I think I actually did meet
tests/les_miserables.txt:71420:Princesse Bagration and in the drawing-rooms of his Lordship the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71421:Vicomte Dambray, peer of France.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71424:It is always a good bit of tactics in knavery to pretend to recognize
tests/les_miserables.txt:71427:Marius paid attention to the manner of this man’s speech. He spied on
tests/les_miserables.txt:71428:his accent and gesture, but his disappointment increased; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71429:pronunciation was nasal and absolutely unlike the dry, shrill tone
tests/les_miserables.txt:71430:which he had expected.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71438:The reply was ungracious. The personage, determined to be gracious at
tests/les_miserables.txt:71439:any cost, insisted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71449:“I have never had the honor of being received by M. de Chateaubriand.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71450:Let us cut it short. What do you want?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71453:The man bowed lower at that harsh voice.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71455:“Monsieur le Baron, deign to listen to me. There is in America, in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71456:district near Panama, a village called la Joya. That village is
tests/les_miserables.txt:71457:composed of a single house, a large, square house of three stories,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71458:built of bricks dried in the sun, each side of the square five hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:71459:feet in length, each story retreating twelve feet back of the story
tests/les_miserables.txt:71460:below, in such a manner as to leave in front a terrace which makes the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71461:circuit of the edifice, in the centre an inner court where the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71463:ladders, ladders to mount from the ground to the first terrace, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:71464:from the first to the second, and from the second to the third, ladders
tests/les_miserables.txt:71465:to descend into the inner court, no doors to the chambers, trap-doors,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71466:no staircases to the chambers, ladders; in the evening the traps are
tests/les_miserables.txt:71467:closed, the ladders are withdrawn, carbines and blunderbusses trained
tests/les_miserables.txt:71468:from the loopholes; no means of entering, a house by day, a citadel by
tests/les_miserables.txt:71470:precautions? because the country is dangerous; it is full of cannibals.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71471:Then why do people go there? because the country is marvellous; gold is
tests/les_miserables.txt:71476:disappointment to impatience.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71478:“At this, Monsieur le Baron. I am an old and weary diplomat. Ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:71479:civilization has thrown me on my own devices. I want to try savages.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71486:peasant woman, who toils by the day, turns round when the diligence
tests/les_miserables.txt:71488:turn round. The dog of the poor man barks at the rich man, the dog of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71489:the rich man barks at the poor man. Each one for himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71490:Self-interest—that’s the object of men. Gold, that’s the loadstone.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71498:journey is long and costly. I need a little money.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71501:“What concern is that of mine?” demanded Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71503:The stranger stretched his neck out of his cravat, a gesture
tests/les_miserables.txt:71504:characteristic of the vulture, and replied with an augmented smile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71509:There was some truth in this. The fact is, that the contents of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71511:read the letter. He could hardly recall it. But a moment ago a fresh
tests/les_miserables.txt:71516:He fixed a penetrating glance on the stranger. An examining judge could
tests/les_miserables.txt:71519:He confined himself to replying:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71521:“State the case precisely.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71525:without straightening his dorsal column, but scrutinizing Marius in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71526:turn, with the green gaze of his spectacles.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71528:“So be it, Monsieur le Baron. I will be precise. I have a secret to
tests/les_miserables.txt:71532:“A secret?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71535:“A secret.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71538:“Which concerns me?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71544:“What is the secret?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71547:Marius scrutinized the man more and more as he listened to him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71549:“I commence gratis,” said the stranger. “You will see that I am
tests/les_miserables.txt:71566:speak of ancient deeds, deeds of the past which have lapsed, which can
tests/les_miserables.txt:71567:be effaced by limitation before the law and by repentance before God. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:71568:speak of recent deeds, of actual facts as still unknown to justice at
tests/les_miserables.txt:71569:this hour. I continue. This man has insinuated himself into your
tests/les_miserables.txt:71570:confidence, and almost into your family under a false name. I am about
tests/les_miserables.txt:71589:“He is an ex-convict.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71595:“You know it since I have had the honor of telling you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71601:Marius’ cold tone, that double reply of “I know it,” his laconicism,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71602:which was not favorable to dialogue, stirred up some smouldering wrath
tests/les_miserables.txt:71603:in the stranger. He launched a furious glance on the sly at Marius,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71604:which was instantly extinguished. Rapid as it was, this glance was of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71605:the kind which a man recognizes when he has once beheld it; it did not
tests/les_miserables.txt:71606:escape Marius. Certain flashes can only proceed from certain souls; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71607:eye, that vent-hole of the thought, glows with it; spectacles hide
tests/les_miserables.txt:71612:“I will not permit myself to contradict Monsieur le Baron. In any case,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71613:you ought to perceive that I am well informed. Now what I have to tell
tests/les_miserables.txt:71614:you is known to myself alone. This concerns the fortune of Madame la
tests/les_miserables.txt:71615:Baronne. It is an extraordinary secret. It is for sale—I make you the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71616:first offer of it. Cheap. Twenty thousand francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71619:“I know that secret as well as the others,” said Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71621:The personage felt the necessity of lowering his price a trifle.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71623:“Monsieur le Baron, say ten thousand francs and I will speak.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71626:“I repeat to you that there is nothing which you can tell me. I know
tests/les_miserables.txt:71630:A fresh flash gleamed in the man’s eye. He exclaimed:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71632:“But I must dine to-day, nevertheless. It is an extraordinary secret, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:71634:francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71639:“I know your extraordinary secret, just as I knew Jean Valjean’s name,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71649:“That is not difficult, Monsieur le Baron. I had the honor to write to
tests/les_miserables.txt:71665:In danger the porcupine bristles up, the beetle feigns death, the old
tests/les_miserables.txt:71668:Then he flicked a grain of dust from the sleeve of his coat with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71671:Marius continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71673:“You are also Jondrette the workman, Fabantou the comedian, Genflot the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71692:“And that you are a rascal. Here.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71695:And Marius drew a bank-note from his pocket and flung it in his face.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71697:“Thanks! Pardon me! five hundred francs! Monsieur le Baron!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71700:And the man, overcome, bowed, seized the note and examined it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71702:“Five hundred francs!” he began again, taken aback. And he stammered in
tests/les_miserables.txt:71703:a low voice: “An honest rustler.”69
tests/les_miserables.txt:71707:“Well, so be it!” he exclaimed. “Let us put ourselves at our ease.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71710:And with the agility of a monkey, flinging back his hair, tearing off
tests/les_miserables.txt:71711:his spectacles, and withdrawing from his nose by sleight of hand the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71712:two quills of which mention was recently made, and which the reader has
tests/les_miserables.txt:71713:also met with on another page of this book, he took off his face as the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71716:His eye lighted up; his uneven brow, with hollows in some places and
tests/les_miserables.txt:71718:had become as sharp as a beak; the fierce and sagacious profile of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71721:“Monsieur le Baron is infallible,” he said in a clear voice whence all
tests/les_miserables.txt:71725:And he straightened up his crooked back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71728:have been troubled, had he been capable of such a thing. He had come to
tests/les_miserables.txt:71729:bring astonishment, and it was he who had received it. This humiliation
tests/les_miserables.txt:71730:had been worth five hundred francs to him, and, taking it all in all,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71731:he accepted it; but he was nonetheless bewildered.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71733:He beheld this Baron Pontmercy for the first time, and, in spite of his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71734:disguise, this Baron Pontmercy recognized him, and recognized him
tests/les_miserables.txt:71735:thoroughly. And not only was this Baron perfectly informed as to
tests/les_miserables.txt:71737:almost beardless young man, who was so glacial and so generous, who
tests/les_miserables.txt:71739:to them, who bullied rascals like a judge, and who paid them like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71743:neighbor, had never seen him, which is not unusual in Paris; he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:71746:knowing him, the letter with which the reader is acquainted.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71748:No connection between that Marius and M. le Baron Pontmercy was
tests/les_miserables.txt:71751:As for the name Pontmercy, it will be recalled that, on the battlefield
tests/les_miserables.txt:71752:of Waterloo, he had only heard the last two syllables, for which he
tests/les_miserables.txt:71753:always entertained the legitimate scorn which one owes to what is
tests/les_miserables.txt:71756:However, through his daughter Azelma, who had started on the scent of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71758:researches, he had succeeded in learning many things, and, from the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71759:depths of his own gloom, he had contrived to grasp more than one
tests/les_miserables.txt:71760:mysterious clew. He had discovered, by dint of industry, or, at least,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71761:by dint of induction, he had guessed who the man was whom he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:71762:encountered on a certain day in the Grand Sewer. From the man he had
tests/les_miserables.txt:71763:easily reached the name. He knew that Madame la Baronne Pontmercy was
tests/les_miserables.txt:71764:Cosette. But he meant to be discreet in that quarter.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71766:Who was Cosette? He did not know exactly himself. He did, indeed, catch
tests/les_miserables.txt:71767:an inkling of illegitimacy, the history of Fantine had always seemed to
tests/les_miserables.txt:71768:him equivocal; but what was the use of talking about that? in order to
tests/les_miserables.txt:71769:cause himself to be paid for his silence? He had, or thought he had,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71770:better wares than that for sale. And, according to all appearances, if
tests/les_miserables.txt:71771:he were to come and make to the Baron Pontmercy this revelation—and
tests/les_miserables.txt:71773:attract the boot of the husband towards the loins of the revealer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71775:From Thénardier’s point of view, the conversation with Marius had not
tests/les_miserables.txt:71776:yet begun. He ought to have drawn back, to have modified his strategy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71777:to have abandoned his position, to have changed his front; but nothing
tests/les_miserables.txt:71778:essential had been compromised as yet, and he had five hundred francs
tests/les_miserables.txt:71779:in his pocket. Moreover, he had something decisive to say, and, even
tests/les_miserables.txt:71780:against this very well-informed and well-armed Baron Pontmercy, he felt
tests/les_miserables.txt:71782:combat. In the one in which he was about to engage, what was his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71784:what he was speaking, he made this rapid review of his inner forces,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71787:Marius had become thoughtful. So he had hold of Thénardier at last.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71789:could honor Colonel Pontmercy’s recommendation.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71792:villain, and that the letter of change drawn from the depths of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71794:It also seemed to him, in the complex state of his mind towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:71795:Thénardier, that there was occasion to avenge the Colonel for the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71796:misfortune of having been saved by such a rascal. In any case, he was
tests/les_miserables.txt:71797:content. He was about to deliver the Colonel’s shade from this unworthy
tests/les_miserables.txt:71798:creditor at last, and it seemed to him that he was on the point of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71799:rescuing his father’s memory from the debtors’ prison. By the side of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71800:this duty there was another—to elucidate, if possible, the source of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71805:He commenced with this.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71807:Thénardier had caused the “honest rustler” to disappear in his fob, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:71810:Marius broke the silence.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71813:tell you your secret—the one that you came here to reveal to me? I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:71816:thief. A thief, because he robbed a wealthy manufacturer, whose ruin he
tests/les_miserables.txt:71817:brought about. An assassin, because he assassinated police-agent
tests/les_miserables.txt:71821:“I don’t understand, sir,” ejaculated Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71823:“I will make myself intelligible. In a certain arrondissement of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71825:justice, and who, under the name of M. Madeleine, had regained his
tests/les_miserables.txt:71826:status and rehabilitated himself. This man had become a just man in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71827:full force of the term. In a trade, the manufacture of black glass
tests/les_miserables.txt:71828:goods, he made the fortune of an entire city. As far as his personal
tests/les_miserables.txt:71829:fortune was concerned he made that also, but as a secondary matter, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:71830:in some sort, by accident. He was the foster-father of the poor. He
tests/les_miserables.txt:71831:founded hospitals, opened schools, visited the sick, dowered young
tests/les_miserables.txt:71833:angel of the country. He refused the cross, he was appointed Mayor. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:71834:liberated convict knew the secret of a penalty incurred by this man in
tests/les_miserables.txt:71835:former days; he denounced him, and had him arrested, and profited by
tests/les_miserables.txt:71836:the arrest to come to Paris and cause the banker Laffitte,—I have the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71837:fact from the cashier himself,—by means of a false signature, to hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:71838:over to him the sum of over half a million which belonged to M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71839:Madeleine. This convict who robbed M. Madeleine was Jean Valjean. As
tests/les_miserables.txt:71840:for the other fact, you have nothing to tell me about it either. Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:71845:Thénardier cast upon Marius the sovereign glance of a conquered man who
tests/les_miserables.txt:71846:lays his hand once more upon the victory, and who has just regained, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:71847:one instant, all the ground which he has lost. But the smile returned
tests/les_miserables.txt:71848:instantly. The inferior’s triumph in the presence of his superior must
tests/les_miserables.txt:71851:Thénardier contented himself with saying to Marius:
tests/les_miserables.txt:71853:“Monsieur le Baron, we are on the wrong track.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71856:And he emphasized this phrase by making his bunch of seals execute an
tests/les_miserables.txt:71859:“What!” broke forth Marius, “do you dispute that? These are facts.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71862:“They are chimæras. The confidence with which Monsieur le Baron honors
tests/les_miserables.txt:71863:me renders it my duty to tell him so. Truth and justice before all
tests/les_miserables.txt:71864:things. I do not like to see folks accused unjustly. Monsieur le Baron,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71869:“This is too much! How is this?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71878:“This is the first: he did not rob M. Madeleine, because it is Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:71885:“And this is the second: he did not assassinate Javert, because the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71892:“That Javert committed suicide.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71895:“Prove it! prove it!” cried Marius beside himself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71897:Thénardier resumed, scanning his phrase after the manner of the ancient
tests/les_miserables.txt:71900:“Police-agent-Ja-vert-was-found-drowned-un-der-a-boat-of-the-Pont-au-
tests/les_miserables.txt:71907:Thénardier drew from his pocket a large envelope of gray paper, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:71908:seemed to contain sheets folded in different sizes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71910:“I have my papers,” he said calmly.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71917:speak, it is because I have proofs. Not manuscript proofs—writing is
tests/les_miserables.txt:71918:suspicious, handwriting is complaisant,—but printed proofs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71921:As he spoke, Thénardier extracted from the envelope two copies of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71922:newspapers, yellow, faded, and strongly saturated with tobacco. One of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71924:seemed much older than the other.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71926:“Two facts, two proofs,” remarked Thénardier. And he offered the two
tests/les_miserables.txt:71929:The reader is acquainted with these two papers. One, the most ancient,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71930:a number of the _Drapeau Blanc_ of the 25th of July, 1823, the text of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71931:which can be seen in the first volume, established the identity of M.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71934:The other, a _Moniteur_ of the 15th of June, 1832, announced the
tests/les_miserables.txt:71935:suicide of Javert, adding that it appeared from a verbal report of
tests/les_miserables.txt:71936:Javert to the prefect that, having been taken prisoner in the barricade
tests/les_miserables.txt:71941:Marius read. He had evidence, a certain date, irrefragable proof, these
tests/les_miserables.txt:71943:backing up Thénardier’s statements; the note printed in the _Moniteur_
tests/les_miserables.txt:71944:had been an administrative communication from the Prefecture of Police.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71945:Marius could not doubt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71947:The information of the cashier-clerk had been false, and he himself had
tests/les_miserables.txt:71948:been deceived.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71950:Jean Valjean, who had suddenly grown grand, emerged from his cloud.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71951:Marius could not repress a cry of joy.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71953:“Well, then this unhappy wretch is an admirable man! the whole of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:71954:fortune really belonged to him! he is Madeleine, the providence of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71955:whole countryside! he is Jean Valjean, Javert’s savior! he is a hero!
tests/les_miserables.txt:71966:“Let us be calm.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71969:Robber, assassin—those words which Marius thought had disappeared and
tests/les_miserables.txt:71970:which returned, fell upon him like an ice-cold shower-bath.
tests/les_miserables.txt:71974:“Always,” ejaculated Thénardier. “Jean Valjean did not rob Madeleine,
tests/les_miserables.txt:71978:“Will you speak,” retorted Marius, “of that miserable theft, committed
tests/les_miserables.txt:71980:life of repentance, of self-abnegation and of virtue?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71984:am speaking of actual facts. What I have to reveal to you is absolutely
tests/les_miserables.txt:71986:it the source of the fortune so skilfully presented to Madame la
tests/les_miserables.txt:71987:Baronne by Jean Valjean. I say skilfully, because, by a gift of that
tests/les_miserables.txt:71989:house whose comforts one would then share, and, at the same stroke, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:71990:conceal one’s crime, and to enjoy one’s theft, to bury one’s name and
tests/les_miserables.txt:71991:to create for oneself a family.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:71997:“Monsieur le Baron, I will tell you all, leaving the recompense to your
tests/les_miserables.txt:71998:generosity. This secret is worth massive gold. You will say to me: ‘Why
tests/les_miserables.txt:72001:consider the combination ingenious; but he has no longer a son, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:72002:would show me his empty hands, and, since I am in need of some money
tests/les_miserables.txt:72004:has nothing. I am a little fatigued, permit me to take a chair.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72009:Thénardier installed himself on a tufted chair, picked up his two
tests/les_miserables.txt:72010:newspapers, thrust them back into their envelope, and murmured as he
tests/les_miserables.txt:72011:pecked at the _Drapeau Blanc_ with his nail: “It cost me a good deal of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72015:That done he crossed his legs and stretched himself out on the back of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72016:the chair, an attitude characteristic of people who are sure of what
tests/les_miserables.txt:72017:they are saying, then he entered upon his subject gravely, emphasizing
tests/les_miserables.txt:72021:day of the insurrection, a man was in the Grand Sewer of Paris, at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72026:Marius abruptly drew his chair closer to that of Thénardier. Thénardier
tests/les_miserables.txt:72027:noticed this movement and continued with the deliberation of an orator
tests/les_miserables.txt:72028:who holds his interlocutor and who feels his adversary palpitating
tests/les_miserables.txt:72031:“This man, forced to conceal himself, and for reasons, moreover, which
tests/les_miserables.txt:72032:are foreign to politics, had adopted the sewer as his domicile and had
tests/les_miserables.txt:72034:eight o’clock in the evening. The man hears a noise in the sewer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72036:of footsteps, some one was walking in the dark, and coming in his
tests/les_miserables.txt:72037:direction. Strange to say, there was another man in the sewer besides
tests/les_miserables.txt:72039:little light which fell through it permitted him to recognize the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72040:newcomer, and to see that the man was carrying something on his back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72042:attitude was an ex-convict, and what he was dragging on his shoulders
tests/les_miserables.txt:72043:was a corpse. Assassination caught in the very act, if ever there was
tests/les_miserables.txt:72044:such a thing. As for the theft, that is understood; one does not kill a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72045:man gratis. This convict was on his way to fling the body into the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72046:river. One fact is to be noticed, that before reaching the exit
tests/les_miserables.txt:72047:grating, this convict, who had come a long distance in the sewer, must,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72048:necessarily, have encountered a frightful quagmire where it seems as
tests/les_miserables.txt:72053:been terrible, for it is impossible to risk one’s life more completely;
tests/les_miserables.txt:72054:I don’t understand how he could have come out of that alive.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72057:Marius’ chair approached still nearer. Thénardier took advantage of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72060:“Monsieur le Baron, a sewer is not the Champ de Mars. One lacks
tests/les_miserables.txt:72062:That is what happened. The man domiciled there and the passer-by were
tests/les_miserables.txt:72063:forced to bid each other good-day, greatly to the regret of both. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:72064:passer-by said to the inhabitant:—“You see what I have on my back, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:72065:must get out, you have the key, give it to me.” That convict was a man
tests/les_miserables.txt:72068:man, but he could see nothing, except that the latter was young, well
tests/les_miserables.txt:72069:dressed, with the air of being rich, and all disfigured with blood.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72070:While talking, the man contrived to tear and pull off behind, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:72071:the assassin perceiving it, a bit of the assassinated man’s coat. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:72072:document for conviction, you understand; a means of recovering the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72073:trace of things and of bringing home the crime to the criminal. He put
tests/les_miserables.txt:72074:this document for conviction in his pocket. After which he opened the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72075:grating, made the man go out with his embarrassment on his back, closed
tests/les_miserables.txt:72076:the grating again, and ran off, not caring to be mixed up with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72079:comprehend. The man who was carrying the corpse was Jean Valjean; the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72080:one who had the key is speaking to you at this moment; and the piece of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72081:the coat . . .”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72084:Thénardier completed his phrase by drawing from his pocket, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:72086:his two forefingers, a strip of torn black cloth, all covered with dark
tests/les_miserables.txt:72090:with his eyes riveted on the fragment of black cloth, and, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:72093:for a key which was in the lock of a cupboard near the chimney.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72095:He found the key, opened the cupboard, plunged his arm into it without
tests/les_miserables.txt:72096:looking, and without his frightened gaze quitting the rag which
tests/les_miserables.txt:72099:But Thénardier continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:72106:“The young man was myself, and here is the coat!” cried Marius, and he
tests/les_miserables.txt:72107:flung upon the floor an old black coat all covered with blood.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72109:Then, snatching the fragment from the hands of Thénardier, he crouched
tests/les_miserables.txt:72110:down over the coat, and laid the torn morsel against the tattered
tests/les_miserables.txt:72111:skirt. The rent fitted exactly, and the strip completed the coat.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72115:This is what he thought: “I’m struck all of a heap.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72120:He fumbled in his pocket and stalked furiously to Thénardier,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72121:presenting to him and almost thrusting in his face his fist filled with
tests/les_miserables.txt:72122:bank-notes for five hundred and a thousand francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72124:“You are an infamous wretch! you are a liar, a calumniator, a villain.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72125:You came to accuse that man, you have only justified him; you wanted to
tests/les_miserables.txt:72126:ruin him, you have only succeeded in glorifying him. And it is you who
tests/les_miserables.txt:72130:choose. Here are a thousand francs, bully that you are!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72133:And he flung a thousand franc note at Thénardier.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72135:“Ah! Jondrette Thénardier, vile rascal! Let this serve you as a lesson,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72136:you dealer in second-hand secrets, merchant of mysteries, rummager of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72137:the shadows, wretch! Take these five hundred francs and get out of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72138:here! Waterloo protects you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72141:“Waterloo!” growled Thénardier, pocketing the five hundred francs along
tests/les_miserables.txt:72150:for a general. And you come here to commit infamies! I tell you that
tests/les_miserables.txt:72151:you have committed all crimes. Go! disappear! Only be happy, that is
tests/les_miserables.txt:72152:all that I desire. Ah! monster! here are three thousand francs more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72153:Take them. You will depart to-morrow, for America, with your daughter;
tests/les_miserables.txt:72154:for your wife is dead, you abominable liar. I shall watch over your
tests/les_miserables.txt:72155:departure, you ruffian, and at that moment I will count out to you
tests/les_miserables.txt:72156:twenty thousand francs. Go get yourself hung elsewhere!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72161:nothing, stupefied and delighted with this sweet crushing beneath sacks
tests/les_miserables.txt:72162:of gold, and with that thunder which had burst forth over his head in
tests/les_miserables.txt:72165:Struck by lightning he was, but he was also content; and he would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:72166:been greatly angered had he had a lightning rod to ward off such
tests/les_miserables.txt:72169:Let us finish with this man at once.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72171:Two days after the events which we are at this moment narrating, he set
tests/les_miserables.txt:72172:out, thanks to Marius’ care, for America under a false name, with his
tests/les_miserables.txt:72174:francs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72176:The moral wretchedness of Thénardier, the bourgeois who had missed his
tests/les_miserables.txt:72177:vocation, was irremediable. He was in America what he had been in
tests/les_miserables.txt:72178:Europe. Contact with an evil man sometimes suffices to corrupt a good
tests/les_miserables.txt:72179:action and to cause evil things to spring from it. With Marius’ money,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72185:“Cosette! Cosette!” he cried. “Come! come quick! Let us go. Basque, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72186:carriage! Cosette, come. Ah! My God! It was he who saved my life! Let
tests/les_miserables.txt:72192:He could not breathe, he laid his hand on his heart to restrain its
tests/les_miserables.txt:72193:throbbing. He paced back and forth with huge strides, he embraced
tests/les_miserables.txt:72196:“Ah! Cosette! I am an unhappy wretch!” said he.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72198:Marius was bewildered. He began to catch a glimpse in Jean Valjean of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72199:some indescribably lofty and melancholy figure. An unheard-of virtue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72201:convict was transfigured into Christ.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72203:Marius was dazzled by this prodigy. He did not know precisely what he
tests/les_miserables.txt:72206:In an instant, a hackney-carriage stood in front of the door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72213:The carriage drove off.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72215:“Ah! what happiness!” ejaculated Cosette. “Rue de l’Homme Armé, I did
tests/les_miserables.txt:72220:You told me that you had never received the letter that I sent you by
tests/les_miserables.txt:72221:Gavroche. It must have fallen into his hands. Cosette, he went to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72222:barricade to save me. As it is a necessity with him to be an angel, he
tests/les_miserables.txt:72223:saved others also; he saved Javert. He rescued me from that gulf to
tests/les_miserables.txt:72224:give me to you. He carried me on his back through that frightful sewer.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72226:providence, he became mine. Just imagine, there was a terrible quagmire
tests/les_miserables.txt:72228:Cosette! he made me traverse it. I was unconscious; I saw nothing, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:72229:heard nothing, I could know nothing of my own adventure. We are going
tests/les_miserables.txt:72230:to bring him back, to take him with us, whether he is willing or not,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72232:that we can find him, I will pass the rest of my life in venerating
tests/les_miserables.txt:72233:him. Yes, that is how it should be, do you see, Cosette? Gavroche must
tests/les_miserables.txt:72241:Meanwhile the carriage rolled on.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72249:Jean Valjean turned round at the knock which he heard on his door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72255:Cosette and Marius made their appearance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72263:And he sat erect in his chair, his arms outstretched and trembling,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72270:Jean Valjean, overcome, stammered:
tests/les_miserables.txt:72275:And, pressed close in Cosette’s arms, he exclaimed:
tests/les_miserables.txt:72281:took a step forward and murmured between lips convulsively contracted
tests/les_miserables.txt:72289:Marius could find no words, and Jean Valjean added:
tests/les_miserables.txt:72299:locks with an adorable movement, and kissed his brow.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72303:Cosette, who only understood in a very confused manner, redoubled her
tests/les_miserables.txt:72304:caresses, as though she desired to pay Marius’ debt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72309:Imagine, Monsieur Pontmercy, at the very moment when you entered, I was
tests/les_miserables.txt:72313:idiot? Just see how idiotic one can be! One reckons without the good
tests/les_miserables.txt:72316:“‘You fancy that you are about to be abandoned, stupid! No. No, things
tests/les_miserables.txt:72318:angel.’ And the angel comes, and one sees one’s Cosette again! and one
tests/les_miserables.txt:72319:sees one’s little Cosette once more! Ah! I was very unhappy.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72322:For a moment he could not speak, then he went on:
tests/les_miserables.txt:72325:needs a bone to gnaw. But I was perfectly conscious that I was in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72327:course, one has not the right to cling eternally.’ Ah! God be praised,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72328:I see her once more! Dost thou know, Cosette, thy husband is very
tests/les_miserables.txt:72329:handsome? Ah! what a pretty embroidered collar thou hast on, luckily. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:72330:am fond of that pattern. It was thy husband who chose it, was it not?
tests/les_miserables.txt:72331:And then, thou shouldst have some cashmere shawls. Let me call her
tests/les_miserables.txt:72332:thou, Monsieur Pontmercy. It will not be for long.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72337:“How wicked of you to have left us like that! Where did you go? Why
tests/les_miserables.txt:72339:or four days. I sent Nicolette, the answer always was: ‘He is absent.’
tests/les_miserables.txt:72340:How long have you been back? Why did you not let us know? Do you know
tests/les_miserables.txt:72341:that you are very much changed? Ah! what a naughty father! he has been
tests/les_miserables.txt:72342:ill, and we have not known it! Stay, Marius, feel how cold his hand
tests/les_miserables.txt:72346:“So you are here! Monsieur Pontmercy, you pardon me!” repeated Jean
tests/les_miserables.txt:72349:At that word which Jean Valjean had just uttered once more, all that
tests/les_miserables.txt:72354:“Cosette, do you hear? he has come to that! he asks my forgiveness! And
tests/les_miserables.txt:72358:He has sacrificed himself. Behold the man. And he says to me the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72361:too little. That barricade, that sewer, that furnace, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:72362:cesspool,—all that he traversed for me, for thee, Cosette! He carried
tests/les_miserables.txt:72363:me away through all the deaths which he put aside before me, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:72364:accepted for himself. Every courage, every virtue, every heroism, every
tests/les_miserables.txt:72365:sanctity he possesses! Cosette, that man is an angel!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72368:“Hush! hush!” said Jean Valjean in a low voice. “Why tell all that?”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72371:“But you!” cried Marius with a wrath in which there was veneration,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72373:people’s lives, and you conceal it from them! You do more, under the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72374:pretext of unmasking yourself, you calumniate yourself. It is
tests/les_miserables.txt:72386:“Because I thought as you do. I thought that you were in the right. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:72387:was necessary that I should go away. If you had known about that
tests/les_miserables.txt:72389:therefore forced to hold my peace. If I had spoken, it would have
tests/les_miserables.txt:72390:caused embarrassment in every way.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72394:“Do you think that you are going to stay here? We shall carry you off.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72395:Ah! good heavens! when I reflect that it was by an accident that I have
tests/les_miserables.txt:72405:“What do you mean?” replied Marius. “Ah! come now, we are not going to
tests/les_miserables.txt:72410:“This time it is for good,” added Cosette. “We have a carriage at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72411:door. I shall run away with you. If necessary, I shall employ force.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72416:“Your chamber still stands ready in our house,” she went on. “If you
tests/les_miserables.txt:72420:‘madame,’ no more ‘Monsieur Jean,’ we are living under a Republic,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72421:everybody says _thou_, don’t they, Marius? The programme is changed. If
tests/les_miserables.txt:72423:which had made her nest in a hole in the wall, and a horrible cat ate
tests/les_miserables.txt:72424:her. My poor, pretty, little robin red-breast which used to put her
tests/les_miserables.txt:72425:head out of her window and look at me! I cried over it. I should have
tests/les_miserables.txt:72426:liked to kill the cat. But now nobody cries any more. Everybody laughs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72427:everybody is happy. You are going to come with us. How delighted
tests/les_miserables.txt:72429:cultivate it, and we shall see whether your strawberries are as fine as
tests/les_miserables.txt:72434:Jean Valjean listened to her without hearing her. He heard the music of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72435:her voice rather than the sense of her words; one of those large tears
tests/les_miserables.txt:72436:which are the sombre pearls of the soul welled up slowly in his eyes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72445:Jean Valjean continued:
tests/les_miserables.txt:72447:“It is quite true that it would be charming for us to live together.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72449:to be among living people who bid each other ‘good-day,’ who call to
tests/les_miserables.txt:72450:each other in the garden. People see each other from early morning. We
tests/les_miserables.txt:72451:should each cultivate our own little corner. She would make me eat her
tests/les_miserables.txt:72452:strawberries. I would make her gather my roses. That would be charming.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72461:The tear did not fall, it retreated, and Jean Valjean replaced it with
tests/les_miserables.txt:72466:“My God!” said she, “your hands are still colder than before. Are you
tests/les_miserables.txt:72483:“To die!” exclaimed Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72490:red-breast is dead? Speak, so that I may hear thy voice.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72495:Cosette uttered a heartrending cry.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72504:the verge of dying when you came. That stopped me, it seemed to me that
tests/les_miserables.txt:72508:“You are full of strength and life,” cried Marius. “Do you imagine that
tests/les_miserables.txt:72509:a person can die like this? You have had sorrow, you shall have no
tests/les_miserables.txt:72512:possession of you once more. There are two of us here who will
tests/les_miserables.txt:72513:henceforth have no other thought than your happiness.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72520:Jean Valjean continued to smile.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72522:“Even if you were to take possession of me, Monsieur Pontmercy, would
tests/les_miserables.txt:72524:and he does not change his mind; it is useful for me to go. Death is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72526:happy, may Monsieur Pontmercy have Cosette, may youth wed the morning,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72527:may there be around you, my children, lilacs and nightingales; may your
tests/les_miserables.txt:72528:life be a beautiful, sunny lawn, may all the enchantments of heaven
tests/les_miserables.txt:72530:certain that all this is right. Come, be reasonable, nothing is
tests/les_miserables.txt:72531:possible now, I am fully conscious that all is over. And then, last
tests/les_miserables.txt:72533:Cosette! Thou art much better off with him than with me.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72536:A noise became audible at the door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72538:It was the doctor entering.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72540:“Good-day, and farewell, doctor,” said Jean Valjean. “Here are my poor
tests/les_miserables.txt:72541:children.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72544:Marius stepped up to the doctor. He addressed to him only this single
tests/les_miserables.txt:72545:word: “Monsieur? . . .” But his manner of pronouncing it contained a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72546:complete question.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72548:The doctor replied to the question by an expressive glance.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72550:“Because things are not agreeable,” said Jean Valjean, “that is no
tests/les_miserables.txt:72554:A silence ensued.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72561:In the depths of the shadow into which he had already descended,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72562:ecstasy was still possible to him when gazing at Cosette. The
tests/les_miserables.txt:72563:reflection of that sweet face lighted up his pale visage.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72565:The doctor felt of his pulse.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72570:And bending down to Marius’ ear, he added in a very low voice:
tests/les_miserables.txt:72575:Jean Valjean surveyed the doctor and Marius serenely, almost without
tests/les_miserables.txt:72576:ceasing to gaze at Cosette.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72578:These barely articulate words were heard to issue from his mouth:
tests/les_miserables.txt:72583:All at once he rose to his feet. These accesses of strength are
tests/les_miserables.txt:72585:the wall, thrusting aside Marius and the doctor who tried to help him,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72586:detached from the wall a little copper crucifix which was suspended
tests/les_miserables.txt:72588:perfect health, and said in a loud voice, as he laid the crucifix on
tests/les_miserables.txt:72594:Then his chest sank in, his head wavered, as though the intoxication of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72597:His hands, which rested on his knees, began to press their nails into
tests/les_miserables.txt:72601:but could not.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72603:Among the words mingled with that mournful saliva which accompanies
tests/les_miserables.txt:72610:It might be said that agony writhes. It goes, comes, advances towards
tests/les_miserables.txt:72611:the sepulchre, and returns towards life. There is groping in the action
tests/les_miserables.txt:72615:make the shadows fall away from it and became almost perfectly lucid
tests/les_miserables.txt:72616:once more.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72620:“He is coming back! doctor, he is coming back,” cried Marius.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72623:what has caused me pain. What has pained me, Monsieur Pontmercy, is
tests/les_miserables.txt:72624:that you have not been willing to touch that money. That money really
tests/les_miserables.txt:72625:belongs to your wife. I will explain to you, my children, and for that
tests/les_miserables.txt:72626:reason, also, I am glad to see you. Black jet comes from England, white
tests/les_miserables.txt:72627:jet comes from Norway. All this is in this paper, which you will read.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72628:For bracelets, I invented a way of substituting for slides of soldered
tests/les_miserables.txt:72630:less costly. You will understand how much money can be made in that
tests/les_miserables.txt:72635:The portress had come upstairs and was gazing in at the half-open door.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72636:The doctor dismissed her.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72638:But he could not prevent this zealous woman from exclaiming to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72644:And with his finger he seemed to indicate a point above his head where
tests/les_miserables.txt:72647:It is probable, in fact, that the Bishop was present at this death
tests/les_miserables.txt:72654:“Have no fear, Monsieur Pontmercy, I adjure you. The six hundred
tests/les_miserables.txt:72655:thousand francs really belong to Cosette. My life will have been wasted
tests/les_miserables.txt:72657:goods. We rivalled what is called Berlin jewellery. However, we could
tests/les_miserables.txt:72658:not equal the black glass of England. A gross, which contains twelve
tests/les_miserables.txt:72659:hundred very well cut grains, only costs three francs.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72663:him with a look which clings convulsively to him and which would fain
tests/les_miserables.txt:72664:hold him back.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72673:His breath had become intermittent; a little rattling interrupted it.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72674:He found some difficulty in moving his forearm, his feet had lost all
tests/les_miserables.txt:72675:movement, and in proportion as the wretchedness of limb and feebleness
tests/les_miserables.txt:72676:of body increased, all the majesty of his soul was displayed and spread
tests/les_miserables.txt:72680:His face paled and smiled. Life was no longer there, it was something
tests/les_miserables.txt:72683:His breath sank, his glance grew grander. He was a corpse on which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72684:wings could be felt.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72689:He began to speak to them in a voice so feeble that it seemed to come
tests/les_miserables.txt:72690:from a distance, and one would have said that a wall now rose between
tests/les_miserables.txt:72696:of thee to place that pillow under my loins! Thou wilt weep for me a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72697:little, wilt thou not? Not too much. I do not wish thee to have any
tests/les_miserables.txt:72698:real griefs. You must enjoy yourselves a great deal, my children. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:72699:forgot to tell you that the profit was greater still on the buckles
tests/les_miserables.txt:72700:without tongues than on all the rest. A gross of a dozen dozens cost
tests/les_miserables.txt:72701:ten francs and sold for sixty. It really was a good business. So there
tests/les_miserables.txt:72702:is no occasion for surprise at the six hundred thousand francs,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72703:Monsieur Pontmercy. It is honest money. You may be rich with a tranquil
tests/les_miserables.txt:72704:mind. Thou must have a carriage, a box at the theatres now and then,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72708:candlesticks which stand on the chimney-piece. They are of silver, but
tests/les_miserables.txt:72709:to me they are gold, they are diamonds; they change candles which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:72710:placed in them into wax-tapers. I do not know whether the person who
tests/les_miserables.txt:72712:could. My children, you will not forget that I am a poor man, you will
tests/les_miserables.txt:72715:cares to come for a little while now and then, it will give me
tests/les_miserables.txt:72716:pleasure. And you too, Monsieur Pontmercy. I must admit that I have not
tests/les_miserables.txt:72719:Cosette happy. If you only knew, Monsieur Pontmercy, her pretty rosy
tests/les_miserables.txt:72720:cheeks were my delight; when I saw her in the least pale, I was sad. In
tests/les_miserables.txt:72721:the chest of drawers, there is a bank-bill for five hundred francs. I
tests/les_miserables.txt:72722:have not touched it. It is for the poor. Cosette, dost thou see thy
tests/les_miserables.txt:72723:little gown yonder on the bed? dost thou recognize it? That was ten
tests/les_miserables.txt:72725:over. Do not weep, my children, I am not going very far, I shall see
tests/les_miserables.txt:72729:of the handle of the water-bucket? That was the first time that I
tests/les_miserables.txt:72730:touched thy poor, little hand. It was so cold! Ah! your hands were red
tests/les_miserables.txt:72732:thou remember? Thou didst call her Catherine. Thou regrettedest not
tests/les_miserables.txt:72733:having taken her to the convent! How thou didst make me laugh
tests/les_miserables.txt:72735:bits of straw on the gutters, and watch them pass away. One day I gave
tests/les_miserables.txt:72736:thee a willow battledore and a shuttlecock with yellow, blue and green
tests/les_miserables.txt:72738:didst play. Thou didst put cherries in thy ears. Those are things of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72739:the past. The forests through which one has passed with one’s child,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72740:the trees under which one has strolled, the convents where one has
tests/les_miserables.txt:72741:concealed oneself, the games, the hearty laughs of childhood, are
tests/les_miserables.txt:72743:stupidity. Those Thénardiers were wicked. Thou must forgive them.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72744:Cosette, the moment has come to tell thee the name of thy mother. She
tests/les_miserables.txt:72745:was called Fantine. Remember that name—Fantine. Kneel whenever thou
tests/les_miserables.txt:72746:utterest it. She suffered much. She loved thee dearly. She had as much
tests/les_miserables.txt:72750:children. Love each other well and always. There is nothing else but
tests/les_miserables.txt:72751:that in the world: love for each other. You will think sometimes of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72753:that I have not seen thee all this time, it cut me to the heart; I went
tests/les_miserables.txt:72754:as far as the corner of the street, I must have produced a queer effect
tests/les_miserables.txt:72755:on the people who saw me pass, I was like a madman, I once went out
tests/les_miserables.txt:72756:without my hat. I no longer see clearly, my children, I had still other
tests/les_miserables.txt:72762:Cosette and Marius fell on their knees, in despair, suffocating with
tests/les_miserables.txt:72763:tears, each beneath one of Jean Valjean’s hands. Those august hands no
tests/les_miserables.txt:72766:He had fallen backwards, the light of the candles illuminated him.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72768:His white face looked up to heaven, he allowed Cosette and Marius to
tests/les_miserables.txt:72769:cover his hands with kisses.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72774:immense angel stood erect with wings outspread, awaiting that soul.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72784:In the cemetery of Père-Lachaise, in the vicinity of the common grave,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72785:far from the elegant quarter of that city of sepulchres, far from all
tests/les_miserables.txt:72786:the tombs of fancy which display in the presence of eternity all the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72787:hideous fashions of death, in a deserted corner, beside an old wall,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72788:beneath a great yew tree over which climbs the wild convolvulus, amid
tests/les_miserables.txt:72790:than others from the leprosy of time, of dampness, of the lichens and
tests/les_miserables.txt:72792:blackens it. It is not near any path, and people are not fond of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72793:walking in that direction, because the grass is high and their feet are
tests/les_miserables.txt:72794:immediately wet. When there is a little sunshine, the lizards come
tests/les_miserables.txt:72798:This stone is perfectly plain. In cutting it the only thought was the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72799:requirements of the tomb, and no other care was taken than to make the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72800:stone long enough and narrow enough to cover a man.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72804:Only, many years ago, a hand wrote upon it in pencil these four lines,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72805:which have become gradually illegible beneath the rain and the dust,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72806:and which are, to-day, probably effaced:
tests/les_miserables.txt:72810:La chose simplement d’elle-même arriva,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72820:HAUTEVILLE-HOUSE, October 18, 1862.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72825:Italy as well as to France, to Germany as well as to Ireland, to
tests/les_miserables.txt:72826:Republics which have slaves as well as to Empires which have serfs.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72827:Social problems overstep frontiers. The sores of the human race, those
tests/les_miserables.txt:72828:great sores which cover the globe, do not halt at the red or blue lines
tests/les_miserables.txt:72829:traced upon the map. In every place where man is ignorant and
tests/les_miserables.txt:72830:despairing, in every place where woman is sold for bread, wherever the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72831:child suffers for lack of the book which should instruct him and of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72832:hearth which should warm him, the book of _Les Misérables_ knocks at
tests/les_miserables.txt:72833:the door and says: “Open to me, I come for you.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72836:At the hour of civilization through which we are now passing, and which
tests/les_miserables.txt:72838:all climes, and he is groaning in all languages.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72840:Your Italy is no more exempt from the evil than is our France. Your
tests/les_miserables.txt:72841:admirable Italy has all miseries on the face of it. Does not banditism,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72843:more deeply eaten by that ulcer of convents which I have endeavored to
tests/les_miserables.txt:72845:Turin, Florence, Sienna, Pisa, Mantua, Bologna, Ferrara, Genoa, Venice,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72846:a heroic history, sublime ruins, magnificent ruins, and superb cities,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72847:you are, like ourselves, poor. You are covered with marvels and vermin.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72851:Like us, you have prejudices, superstitions, tyrannies, fanaticisms,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72852:blind laws lending assistance to ignorant customs. You taste nothing of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72855:lazzarone. The social question is the same for you as for us. There are
tests/les_miserables.txt:72857:social hygiene is not much better than ours; shadows, which are
tests/les_miserables.txt:72858:Protestant in England, are Catholic in Italy; but, under different
tests/les_miserables.txt:72859:names, the _vescovo_ is identical with the _bishop_, and it always
tests/les_miserables.txt:72864:Is it necessary to emphasize this? Must this melancholy parallelism be
tests/les_miserables.txt:72865:yet more completely verified? Have you not indigent persons? Glance
tests/les_miserables.txt:72866:below. Have you not parasites? Glance up. Does not that hideous
tests/les_miserables.txt:72867:balance, whose two scales, pauperism and parasitism, so mournfully
tests/les_miserables.txt:72868:preserve their mutual equilibrium, oscillate before you as it does
tests/les_miserables.txt:72869:before us? Where is your army of schoolmasters, the only army which
tests/les_miserables.txt:72870:civilization acknowledges?
tests/les_miserables.txt:72872:Where are your free and compulsory schools? Does every one know how to
tests/les_miserables.txt:72873:read in the land of Dante and of Michael Angelo? Have you made public
tests/les_miserables.txt:72874:schools of your barracks? Have you not, like ourselves, an opulent
tests/les_miserables.txt:72875:war-budget and a paltry budget of education? Have not you also that
tests/les_miserables.txt:72876:passive obedience which is so easily converted into soldierly
tests/les_miserables.txt:72877:obedience? military establishment which pushes the regulations to the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72879:of Italy? Let us subject your social order to examination, let us take
tests/les_miserables.txt:72880:it where it stands and as it stands, let us view its flagrant offences,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72881:show me the woman and the child. It is by the amount of protection with
tests/les_miserables.txt:72882:which these two feeble creatures are surrounded that the degree of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72883:civilization is to be measured. Is prostitution less heartrending in
tests/les_miserables.txt:72885:your laws, and what amount of justice springs from your tribunals? Do
tests/les_miserables.txt:72886:you chance to be so fortunate as to be ignorant of the meaning of those
tests/les_miserables.txt:72887:gloomy words: public prosecution, legal infamy, prison, the scaffold,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72888:the executioner, the death penalty? Italians, with you as with us,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72889:Beccaria is dead and Farinace is alive. And then, let us scrutinize
tests/les_miserables.txt:72890:your state reasons. Have you a government which comprehends the
tests/les_miserables.txt:72891:identity of morality and politics? You have reached the point where you
tests/les_miserables.txt:72893:France. Stay, let us pass miseries in review, let each one contribute
tests/les_miserables.txt:72894:his pile, you are as rich as we. Have you not, like ourselves, two
tests/les_miserables.txt:72895:condemnations, religious condemnation pronounced by the priest, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:72896:social condemnation decreed by the judge? Oh, great nation of Italy,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72897:thou resemblest the great nation of France! Alas! our brothers, you
tests/les_miserables.txt:72900:From the depths of the gloom wherein you dwell, you do not see much
tests/les_miserables.txt:72901:more distinctly than we the radiant and distant portals of Eden. Only,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72906:ours. Certain men, certain castes, rise in revolt against this book,—I
tests/les_miserables.txt:72911:country, but without being engrossed by France more than by any other
tests/les_miserables.txt:72912:nation. In proportion as I advance in life, I grow more simple, and I
tests/les_miserables.txt:72913:become more and more patriotic for humanity.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72915:This is, moreover, the tendency of our age, and the law of radiance of
tests/les_miserables.txt:72916:the French Revolution; books must cease to be exclusively French,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72917:Italian, German, Spanish, or English, and become European, I say more,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72918:human, if they are to correspond to the enlargement of civilization.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72920:Hence a new logic of art, and of certain requirements of composition
tests/les_miserables.txt:72921:which modify everything, even the conditions, formerly narrow, of taste
tests/les_miserables.txt:72922:and language, which must grow broader like all the rest.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72924:In France, certain critics have reproached me, to my great delight,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72925:with having transgressed the bounds of what they call “French taste”; I
tests/les_miserables.txt:72928:In short, I am doing what I can, I suffer with the same universal
tests/les_miserables.txt:72929:suffering, and I try to assuage it, I possess only the puny forces of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72930:man, and I cry to all: “Help me!”
tests/les_miserables.txt:72934:for your country. If I have insisted so strongly, it is because of one
tests/les_miserables.txt:72938:Misérables_, is a French book. It does not concern us. Let the French
tests/les_miserables.txt:72939:read it as a history, we read it as a romance.’”—Alas! I repeat,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72940:whether we be Italians or Frenchmen, misery concerns us all. Ever since
tests/les_miserables.txt:72941:history has been written, ever since philosophy has meditated, misery
tests/les_miserables.txt:72942:has been the garment of the human race; the moment has at length
tests/les_miserables.txt:72943:arrived for tearing off that rag, and for replacing, upon the naked
tests/les_miserables.txt:72947:If this letter seems to you of service in enlightening some minds and
tests/les_miserables.txt:72948:in dissipating some prejudices, you are at liberty to publish it, sir.
tests/les_miserables.txt:72949:Accept, I pray you, a renewed assurance of my very distinguished
tests/les_miserables.txt:72959:1 (return) [ Patois of the French Alps: _chat de maraude_, rascally
tests/les_miserables.txt:72962:2 (return) [ Liège: a cork-tree. Pau: a jest on _peau_, skin.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:72964:3 (return) [ She belonged to that circle where cuckoos and carriages
tests/les_miserables.txt:72966:the space of a morning (or jade).]
tests/les_miserables.txt:72968:4 (return) [ An ex-convict.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:72974:7 (return) [ Walter Scott, Lamartine, Vaulabelle, Charras, Quinet,
tests/les_miserables.txt:72977:8 (return) [ This is the inscription:—D. O. M. CY A ETE ÉCRASÉ PAR
tests/les_miserables.txt:72984:repaired, greater successes assured for the morrow,—all was lost by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72985:moment of panic, terror.”—Napoleon, Dictées de Sainte Hélène.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:72989:12 (return) [ Literally “made cuirs”; _i. e._, pronounced a _t_ or an
tests/les_miserables.txt:72990:_s_ at the end of words where the opposite letter should occur, or used
tests/les_miserables.txt:72993:13 (return) [ Lawyer Corbeau, perched on a docket, held in his beak a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72994:writ of execution; Lawyer Renard, attracted by the smell, addressed him
tests/les_miserables.txt:72995:nearly as follows, etc.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:72997:14 (return) [ This is the factory of Goblet Junior: Come choose your
tests/les_miserables.txt:72998:jugs and crocks, Flower-pots, pipes, bricks. The Heart sells Diamonds
tests/les_miserables.txt:72999:to every comer.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73004:preserve us and our effects. If you repeat this verse, you will not
tests/les_miserables.txt:73007:16 (return) [ Instead of _porte cochère_ and _porte bàtarde_.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73011:18 (return) [ _Chicken: _ slang allusion to the noise made in calling
tests/les_miserables.txt:73014:19 (return) [ Louis XVIII. is represented in comic pictures of that day
tests/les_miserables.txt:73017:20 (return) [ Tuck into your trousers the shirt-tail that is hanging
tests/les_miserables.txt:73021:base, soil (Des solles), greenhouse and house (Decazes) must be
tests/les_miserables.txt:73022:changed.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73031:to quit my mother’s love, I would say to great Cæsar, “Take back thy
tests/les_miserables.txt:73032:sceptre and thy chariot; I prefer the love of my mother.”]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73035:to his cave.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73037:27 (return) [ The peep-hole is a _Judas_ in French. Hence the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73041:instants of happiness! To adore each other for eight days was hardly
tests/les_miserables.txt:73047:30 (return) [ A democrat.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73049:31 (return) [ King Bootkick went a-hunting after crows, mounted on two
tests/les_miserables.txt:73052:32 (return) [ In olden times, fouriers were the officials who preceded
tests/les_miserables.txt:73055:33 (return) [ A game of ninepins, in which one side of the ball is
tests/les_miserables.txt:73057:describes a curve on the ground.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73061:35 (return) [ _Merlan:_ a sobriquet given to hairdressers because they
tests/les_miserables.txt:73064:36 (return) [ The scaffold.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73072:40 (return) [ “Vous trouverez dans ces potains-là, une foultitude de
tests/les_miserables.txt:73075:41 (return) [ It must be observed, however, that _mac_ in Celtic means
tests/les_miserables.txt:73078:42 (return) [ Smoke puffed in the face of a person asleep.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73080:43 (return) [ Je n’entrave que le dail comment meck, le daron des
tests/les_miserables.txt:73081:orgues, peut atiger ses mômes et ses momignards et les locher criblant
tests/les_miserables.txt:73085:bourgeois gets flurried over an apocryphal scrawl, practice virtue,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73095:drunk as thrushes in a vineyard; a tiger laughed at them in his cave.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73096:The one cursed, the other swore. When shall we go to the forest?
tests/les_miserables.txt:73102:48 (return) [ She astounds at ten paces, she frightens at two, a wart
tests/les_miserables.txt:73107:49 (return) [ _Matelote:_ a culinary preparation of various fishes.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73110:50 (return) [ Treat if you can, and eat if you dare.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73114:52 (return) [ Municipal officer of Toulouse.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73118:dressed and in love? When, by adding your age to my age, we could not
tests/les_miserables.txt:73119:count forty years between us, and when, in our humble and tiny
tests/les_miserables.txt:73121:Manuel was proud and wise, Paris sat at sacred banquets, Foy launched
tests/les_miserables.txt:73122:thunderbolts, and your corsage had a pin on which I pricked myself.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73127:charming bonnet is hardly unfolded. I wandered with thee, pressing thy
tests/les_miserables.txt:73128:supple arm. The passers-by thought that love bewitched had wedded, in
tests/les_miserables.txt:73129:our happy couple, the gentle month of April to the fair month of May.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73130:We lived concealed, content, with closed doors, devouring love, that
tests/les_miserables.txt:73132:had already responded. The Sorbonne was the bucolic spot where I adored
tests/les_miserables.txt:73134:chart of the Tender to the Latin country. O Place Maubert! O Place
tests/les_miserables.txt:73136:stocking on thy delicate leg, I saw a star in the depths of the garret.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73138:better than Malebranche and then Lamennais thou didst demonstrate to me
tests/les_miserables.txt:73139:celestial goodness with a flower which thou gavest to me, I obeyed
tests/les_miserables.txt:73140:thee, thou didst submit to me; oh gilded garret! to lace thee! to
tests/les_miserables.txt:73141:behold thee going and coming from dawn in thy chemise, gazing at thy
tests/les_miserables.txt:73142:young brow in thine ancient mirror! And who, then, would forego the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73144:and of moire, when love stammers a charming slang? Our gardens
tests/les_miserables.txt:73145:consisted of a pot of tulips; thou didst mask the window with thy
tests/les_miserables.txt:73146:petticoat; I took the earthenware bowl and I gave thee the Japanese
tests/les_miserables.txt:73147:cup. And those great misfortunes which made us laugh! Thy cuff
tests/les_miserables.txt:73148:scorched, thy boa lost! And that dear portrait of the divine
tests/les_miserables.txt:73149:Shakespeare which we sold one evening that we might sup! I was a beggar
tests/les_miserables.txt:73150:and thou wert charitable. I kissed thy fresh round arms in haste. A
tests/les_miserables.txt:73151:folio Dante served us as a table on which to eat merrily a centime’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:73152:worth of chestnuts. The first time that, in my joyous den, I snatched a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73154:blushing, I turned deathly pale and I believed in God. Dost thou recall
tests/les_miserables.txt:73155:our innumerable joys, and all those fichus changed to rags? Oh! what
tests/les_miserables.txt:73160:gendarmes that I may say a word to them. With a blue capote and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73161:chicken in his shako, here’s the banlieue, co-cocorico.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73174:My friend Pierrot, thou pratest, because Mila knocked at her pane the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73175:other day and called me. The jades are very charming, their poison
tests/les_miserables.txt:73176:which bewitched me would intoxicate Monsieur Orfila. I’m fond of love
tests/les_miserables.txt:73177:and its bickerings, I love Agnes, I love Pamela, Lise burned herself in
tests/les_miserables.txt:73180:gleamest in the dark thou crownest Lola with roses, I would lose my
tests/les_miserables.txt:73181:soul for that. Jeanne, at thy mirror thou deckest thyself! One fine
tests/les_miserables.txt:73183:night, when I come from the quadrilles, I show Stella to the stars, and
tests/les_miserables.txt:73187:stop to this sort of public order. Does any one wish to play at
tests/les_miserables.txt:73188:skittles? The whole ancient world fell in ruin, when the big ball
tests/les_miserables.txt:73189:rolled. Good old folks, let us smash with our crutches that Louvre
tests/les_miserables.txt:73190:where the monarchy displayed itself in furbelows. We have forced its
tests/les_miserables.txt:73191:gates. On that day, King Charles X. did not stick well and came
tests/les_miserables.txt:73195:which the bodies of executed criminals were dragged by hooks to be
tests/les_miserables.txt:73200:60 (return) [ From _casser_, to break: break-necks.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73203:adore her petticoat, the rogue.” “Love, thou dwellest in her; For ’tis
tests/les_miserables.txt:73204:in her eyes that thou placest thy quiver, sly scamp!” “As for me, I
tests/les_miserables.txt:73208:62 (return) [ In allusion to the expression, _coiffer
tests/les_miserables.txt:73211:63 (return) [ “Thus, hemming in the course of thy musings, Alcippus, it
tests/les_miserables.txt:73217:65 (return) [ “Triton trotted on before, and drew from his conch-shell
tests/les_miserables.txt:73221:children.”]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73231:He died when he had no longer his angel. The thing came to pass simply,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73232:of itself, as the night comes when day is gone.]
tests/les_miserables.txt:73241:Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
tests/les_miserables.txt:73244:Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
tests/les_miserables.txt:73245:law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73246:so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
tests/les_miserables.txt:73247:States without permission and without paying copyright
tests/les_miserables.txt:73248:royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
tests/les_miserables.txt:73249:of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73250:Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73251:concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73252:and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
tests/les_miserables.txt:73253:the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
tests/les_miserables.txt:73254:of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
tests/les_miserables.txt:73255:copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
tests/les_miserables.txt:73256:easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
tests/les_miserables.txt:73257:of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73259:do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
tests/les_miserables.txt:73260:by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
tests/les_miserables.txt:73261:license, especially commercial redistribution.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73270:To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
tests/les_miserables.txt:73271:distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
tests/les_miserables.txt:73272:(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73273:Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
tests/les_miserables.txt:73274:Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
tests/les_miserables.txt:73275:www.gutenberg.org/license.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73277:Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73278:electronic works
tests/les_miserables.txt:73280:1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73281:electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
tests/les_miserables.txt:73282:and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
tests/les_miserables.txt:73283:(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
tests/les_miserables.txt:73284:the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
tests/les_miserables.txt:73285:destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
tests/les_miserables.txt:73286:possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73287:Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
tests/les_miserables.txt:73291:1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
tests/les_miserables.txt:73292:used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
tests/les_miserables.txt:73294:things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
tests/les_miserables.txt:73295:even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
tests/les_miserables.txt:73296:paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73297:Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:73298:agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73299:electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73301:1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73302:Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
tests/les_miserables.txt:73303:of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
tests/les_miserables.txt:73304:works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
tests/les_miserables.txt:73305:States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73306:United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:73307:claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73308:displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
tests/les_miserables.txt:73309:all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
tests/les_miserables.txt:73310:that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
tests/les_miserables.txt:73311:free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73312:works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73313:Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
tests/les_miserables.txt:73314:comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73315:same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
tests/les_miserables.txt:73316:you share it without charge with others.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73318:1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
tests/les_miserables.txt:73319:what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
tests/les_miserables.txt:73320:in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73321:check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:73322:agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73323:distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
tests/les_miserables.txt:73324:other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
tests/les_miserables.txt:73325:representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
tests/les_miserables.txt:73326:country other than the United States.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73328:1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
tests/les_miserables.txt:73330:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
tests/les_miserables.txt:73331:immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
tests/les_miserables.txt:73332:prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
tests/les_miserables.txt:73333:on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73334:phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73335:performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
tests/les_miserables.txt:73338:    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
tests/les_miserables.txt:73339:    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
tests/les_miserables.txt:73340:    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
tests/les_miserables.txt:73342:    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
tests/les_miserables.txt:73343:    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73345:1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
tests/les_miserables.txt:73346:derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
tests/les_miserables.txt:73347:contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73348:copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
tests/les_miserables.txt:73349:the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
tests/les_miserables.txt:73350:redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73351:Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
tests/les_miserables.txt:73353:obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73356:1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
tests/les_miserables.txt:73357:with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
tests/les_miserables.txt:73358:must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
tests/les_miserables.txt:73359:additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
tests/les_miserables.txt:73360:will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
tests/les_miserables.txt:73361:posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73364:1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73365:License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:73366:work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73368:1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
tests/les_miserables.txt:73369:electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
tests/les_miserables.txt:73370:prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
tests/les_miserables.txt:73371:active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73372:Gutenberg™ License.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73374:1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73375:compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
tests/les_miserables.txt:73376:any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
tests/les_miserables.txt:73377:to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
tests/les_miserables.txt:73378:other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
tests/les_miserables.txt:73379:version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
tests/les_miserables.txt:73380:(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
tests/les_miserables.txt:73381:to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
tests/les_miserables.txt:73382:of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
tests/les_miserables.txt:73383:Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73384:full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73386:1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73387:performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
tests/les_miserables.txt:73388:unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73390:1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
tests/les_miserables.txt:73391:access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
tests/les_miserables.txt:73395:        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
tests/les_miserables.txt:73396:        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
tests/les_miserables.txt:73397:        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
tests/les_miserables.txt:73398:        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73399:        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
tests/les_miserables.txt:73400:        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
tests/les_miserables.txt:73401:        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
tests/les_miserables.txt:73402:        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73403:        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
tests/les_miserables.txt:73404:        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
tests/les_miserables.txt:73405:        Literary Archive Foundation.”
tests/les_miserables.txt:73408:        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
tests/les_miserables.txt:73409:        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73410:        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
tests/les_miserables.txt:73411:        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
tests/les_miserables.txt:73412:        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73415:    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
tests/les_miserables.txt:73416:        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73417:        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
tests/les_miserables.txt:73418:        receipt of the work.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73420:    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
tests/les_miserables.txt:73421:        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73424:1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73425:Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
tests/les_miserables.txt:73427:from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
tests/les_miserables.txt:73428:the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
tests/les_miserables.txt:73429:forth in Section 3 below.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73433:1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
tests/les_miserables.txt:73434:effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
tests/les_miserables.txt:73435:works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73436:Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73437:electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
tests/les_miserables.txt:73438:contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
tests/les_miserables.txt:73439:or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
tests/les_miserables.txt:73440:intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
tests/les_miserables.txt:73441:other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
tests/les_miserables.txt:73442:cannot be read by your equipment.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73444:1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
tests/les_miserables.txt:73445:of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73446:Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73447:Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73448:Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
tests/les_miserables.txt:73449:liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
tests/les_miserables.txt:73458:1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73459:defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
tests/les_miserables.txt:73460:receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73461:written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
tests/les_miserables.txt:73462:received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
tests/les_miserables.txt:73464:with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
tests/les_miserables.txt:73465:lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
tests/les_miserables.txt:73466:or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
tests/les_miserables.txt:73467:opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
tests/les_miserables.txt:73468:the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
tests/les_miserables.txt:73471:1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
tests/les_miserables.txt:73476:1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
tests/les_miserables.txt:73477:warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
tests/les_miserables.txt:73478:damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
tests/les_miserables.txt:73479:violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73480:agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
tests/les_miserables.txt:73481:limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
tests/les_miserables.txt:73482:unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73487:providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
tests/les_miserables.txt:73488:accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73489:production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73490:electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73491:including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
tests/les_miserables.txt:73492:the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
tests/les_miserables.txt:73493:or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
tests/les_miserables.txt:73494:additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
tests/les_miserables.txt:73495:Defect you cause.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73497:Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
tests/les_miserables.txt:73499:Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
tests/les_miserables.txt:73500:electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
tests/les_miserables.txt:73501:computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
tests/les_miserables.txt:73502:exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
tests/les_miserables.txt:73505:Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73506:assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
tests/les_miserables.txt:73507:goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
tests/les_miserables.txt:73508:remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73509:Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
tests/les_miserables.txt:73510:and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
tests/les_miserables.txt:73511:generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
tests/les_miserables.txt:73512:Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
tests/les_miserables.txt:73513:Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73515:Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
tests/les_miserables.txt:73517:The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
tests/les_miserables.txt:73518:501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
tests/les_miserables.txt:73520:Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
tests/les_miserables.txt:73521:number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
tests/les_miserables.txt:73522:Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
tests/les_miserables.txt:73525:The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73526:Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
tests/les_miserables.txt:73527:to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
tests/les_miserables.txt:73528:and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
tests/les_miserables.txt:73530:Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
tests/les_miserables.txt:73531:Literary Archive Foundation
tests/les_miserables.txt:73533:Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
tests/les_miserables.txt:73534:public support and donations to carry out its mission of
tests/les_miserables.txt:73535:increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
tests/les_miserables.txt:73536:freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
tests/les_miserables.txt:73537:array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
tests/les_miserables.txt:73538:($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
tests/les_miserables.txt:73541:The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
tests/les_miserables.txt:73542:charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
tests/les_miserables.txt:73543:States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73544:considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
tests/les_miserables.txt:73545:with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
tests/les_miserables.txt:73546:where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
tests/les_miserables.txt:73547:DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
tests/les_miserables.txt:73550:While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
tests/les_miserables.txt:73551:have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
tests/les_miserables.txt:73552:against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
tests/les_miserables.txt:73553:approach us with offers to donate.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73555:International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
tests/les_miserables.txt:73556:any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
tests/les_miserables.txt:73559:Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
tests/les_miserables.txt:73560:methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
tests/les_miserables.txt:73561:ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
tests/les_miserables.txt:73564:Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
tests/les_miserables.txt:73566:Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
tests/les_miserables.txt:73567:Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
tests/les_miserables.txt:73568:freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
tests/les_miserables.txt:73569:distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
tests/les_miserables.txt:73572:Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
tests/les_miserables.txt:73573:editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
tests/les_miserables.txt:73574:the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
tests/les_miserables.txt:73575:necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
tests/les_miserables.txt:73578:Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
tests/les_miserables.txt:73579:facility: www.gutenberg.org.
tests/les_miserables.txt:73581:This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
tests/les_miserables.txt:73582:including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
tests/les_miserables.txt:73583:Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
tests/les_miserables.txt:73584:subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
