tests/les_miserables.txt:1169:“Sire,” said M. Myriel, “you are looking at a good man, and I at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1206:never been pretty; her whole life, which had been nothing but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1255:The hospital was a low and narrow building of a single story, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1421:first came. Now he does like the rest; he must have a carriage and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1435:That same evening the Bishop wrote out and handed to his sister a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1533:and inheritance he said: “Look at the mountaineers of Devolny, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1546:the people of Queyras: “Do you know how they manage?” he said. “Since a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1547:little country of a dozen or fifteen hearths cannot always support a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1583:were the natural heirs. The youngest of the three was to receive from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1597:At another time, on receiving a notification of the decease of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1612:represented as charming and desirable. Among the audience there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1624:When it was a question of charity, he was not to be rebuffed even by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1675:of distinctness, and without the frown of the ferociously virtuous, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1689:of the angel. All which is terrestrial is subject to sin. Sin is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1694:quickly, “Oh! oh!” he said, with a smile; “to all appearance, this is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1808:upon it, from saying yes or no, so long as one has not seen a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1828:the judge and the carpenter, a spectre which seems to live with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1885:vicars-general. He has congregations to reprove, privileges to grant, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1897:both these kinds of toil; he called them _gardening_. “The mind is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1900:Towards midday, when the weather was fine, he went forth and took a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1931:fine game from the mountains. Every curé furnished the pretext for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:1991:chambers on the first, and an attic above. Behind the house was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2003:the house, and abutted on the garden, had been transformed into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2004:kitchen and cellar. In addition to this, there was in the garden a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2055:Mademoiselle Baptistine’s ambition had been to be able to purchase a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2056:set of drawing-room furniture in yellow Utrecht velvet, stamped with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2099:which finally became so old, that, in order to avoid the expense of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2196:Monsieur was sure that he was not committing an indiscretion, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2219:omit, because it is one of the sort which show us best what sort of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2329:could only place at his disposal a wretched village sacristy, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2381:permits. Let us confine ourselves to prayer, when we think that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2430:“Egad, Bishop, let’s have a discussion. It is hard for a senator and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2487:I am square on the bottom, I am. Immortality, Bishop, is a chance, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2545:seekers. But you are good-natured princes, and you do not think it a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2589:to the poor; and they are very ugly besides, and I should much prefer a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2622:him; he is terrible.” Now I have ended by getting used to it. I make a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2667:had on knee-caps, and he said, “What has he got on his knees?” He is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2678:trembled, but they let him alone. Sometimes Madame Magloire essayed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2713:had not voted for the death of the king, but almost. He was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2875:Meanwhile, the member of the Convention had been surveying him with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2904:“I congratulate you,” said he, in the tone which one uses for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:2959:“You have demolished. It may be of use to demolish, but I distrust a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3072:cheer, who eat moor-hens on Friday, who strut about, a lackey before, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3135:mingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice; still, there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3182:with a fit of trembling. He looked towards heaven, and in his glance a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3265:Any allusion to “that old wretch of a G——” caused him to fall into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3273:“Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3330:clocks! What beautiful carpets! What beautiful liveries! They must be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3340:very little that is charitable about them. An opulent priest is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3345:to imagine a man near a brazier who is not warm? Can one imagine a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3366:Besides his sister, Mademoiselle Baptistine, he had two brothers, one a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3386:this: It would have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3400:the right to be the exterminators of the last. He who has not been a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3428:Emperor. He was an old non-commissioned officer of the old guard, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3469:a bishop is equivalent to getting one’s foot in the stirrup for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3505:priests about him. We have seen that he “did not take” in Paris. Not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3547:sold as leather, four hundred thousand francs of income; let a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3665:going to bed, and after the two women had retired. It seemed to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3675:hour when nocturnal flowers offer their perfume, illuminated like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3718:and to use an expression now in fashion, give to the Bishop of D—— a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3735:gloomy openings stand yawning there, but something tells you, you, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3826:difficult to encounter a wayfarer of more wretched appearance. He was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3828:might have been forty-six or forty-eight years old. A cap with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3875:_Three Dauphins_. It was said that General Bertrand, disguised as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:3947:attentively, then tossed his head, and remained thoughtful for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4130:made no reply except by redoubling his gait. This fishmonger had been a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4188:street. In the midst of these gardens and hedges he caught sight of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4196:smoking soup-tureen. At this table sat a man of about forty, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4223:He was a man of lofty stature, half peasant, half artisan. He wore a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4224:huge leather apron, which reached to his left shoulder, and which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4273:surveyed the newcomer from head to feet, and suddenly exclaimed, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4308:himself in the garden. He approached the hut; its door consisted of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4315:warm there, and he found a tolerably good bed of straw. He lay, for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4316:moment, stretched out on this bed, without the power to make a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4332:with his stick which masters in that sort of fencing designate as _la
tests/les_miserables.txt:4358:clouds formed at the summit of the sky a sort of whitish arch, whence a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4361:The earth was thus better lighted than the sky, which produces a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4495:The dining-room was an oblong apartment, with a fireplace, which had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4516:and Mademoiselle Baptistine that of a _lady_. Madame Magloire wore a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4518:neck, the only bit of feminine jewelry that there was in the house, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4524:Mademoiselle Baptistine’s gown was cut on the patterns of 1806, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4549:considerable vivacity. She was haranguing Mademoiselle Baptistine on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4554:Magloire had heard things in divers places. People had spoken of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4583:Then Madame Magloire began the whole story afresh, exaggerating it a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4584:little without being aware of the fact. It appeared that a Bohemian, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4614:the work of a moment; for I say that nothing is more terrible than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4643:him. He had his knapsack on his shoulders, his cudgel in his hand, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4666:been walking for four days since I left Toulon. I have travelled a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4671:me. I went to the prison; the jailer would not admit me. I went into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4672:dog’s kennel; the dog bit me and chased me off, as though he had been a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4771:wagons at Grasse. Since you are an abbé, I will tell you that we had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4796:gently grave and polished, the man’s face lighted up. _Monsieur_ to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4850:Listen. There will be more joy in heaven over the tear-bathed face of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:4858:water, oil, bread, and salt; a little bacon, a bit of mutton, figs, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5020:sent Madame Magloire down a moment later, to carry to the man’s bed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5065:Hardly had he pronounced these words full of peace, when all of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5069:that moment. Did he intend to convey a warning or to throw out a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5123:Mathieu; his father was called Jean Valjean or Vlajean, probably a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5155:far from the Valjean thatched cottage, on the other side of the lane, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5166:In pruning season he earned eighteen sous a day; then he hired out as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5245:their own country had seen his sister. She was in Paris. She lived in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5325:light of nature was ignited in him. Unhappiness, which also possesses a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5407:suffering, he had gradually arrived at the conviction that life is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5414:unfortunate men who had a mind for them. He was of the number who had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5441:human soul, was there not in the soul of Jean Valjean in particular, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5480:habitually in this shadow, feeling his way like a blind man and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5484:abruptly all around him, in front, behind, amid the gleams of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5491:brutalizing—predominates, is to transform a man, little by little, by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5492:sort of stupid transfiguration, into a wild beast; sometimes into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5502:would have said, “Remain!” But in the presence of so violent a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5732:his earnings, during his sojourn in the galleys, ought to amount to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5817:out his arm and felt of his knapsack, which he had thrown down on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5847:of light, eclipses, then bright openings of the clouds; and indoors a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5924:that that hinge had just become animated, and had suddenly assumed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5975:of hope, and of felicity. It was more than a smile, and almost a
tests/les_miserables.txt:5977:which was invisible. The soul of the just contemplates in sleep a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6168:standing near the door. He entered and advanced to the Bishop, making a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6292:soil from every pebble, Jean Valjean sat down behind a bush upon a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6298:In the middle of this meditation, which would have contributed not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6370:then he stretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6482:was a little lad, about ten years old, with a marmot, I think, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6524:clenched in his hair and his face on his knees, and he cried, “I am a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6552:intoxicated. As he walked thus with haggard eyes, did he have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6623:Excess of unhappiness had, as we have remarked, made him in some sort a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6649:remained; he filled the whole soul of this wretched man with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6697:and the majesty of profile peculiar to a man who has performed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6727:two things were popular: the Voltaire-Touquet and the snuff-box _à la
tests/les_miserables.txt:6811:themselves colleges. The collegians, decorated on the collar with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6845:in marble. The Abbé Caron was speaking, in terms of praise, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6921:Listolier adored Dahlia, who had taken for her nickname the name of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:6950:was an old unmarried professor of mathematics, a brutal man and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7023:preserved. He was wrinkled and toothless, and he had the beginning of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7030:youth, which was packing up for departure long before its time, beat a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7080:follies possible at that time. The vacation was beginning, and it was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7100:you? Have you slid, laughing, down a slope all wet with rain, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7101:beloved woman holding your hand, and crying, “Ah, my new boots! what a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7110:All four were madly pretty. A good old classic poet, then famous, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7117:over bushes, and presided over this merry-making with the spirit of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7174:lids, feet arched and small, wrists and ankles admirably formed, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7252:and there is in the air the brilliance of an apotheosis—what a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7281:cabinet of mirrors, the wanton trap worthy of a satyr become a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7287:somewhat of a Spaniard, Toulouse being the cousin of Tolosa, sang, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7412:the Restoration beheld the populace of Paris in too “rose-colored” a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7421:and Danton’s resource. Is it a question of country, he enlists; is it a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7423:with wrath, is epic; his blouse drapes itself like the folds of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7778:“Tholomyès,” exclaimed Fameuil, “Listolier and I were having a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7847:shock caused the cart and the orator to come to a dead halt. It was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7879:hour for giving these ladies a surprise has struck. Wait for us a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7956:In this manner a certain time elapsed. All at once Favourite made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:7984:Favourite snatched the paper from the waiter’s hand. It was, in fact, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8079:Nothing is more common than a cart or a truck at the door of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8164:A woman stood before her, a few paces distant. This woman also had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8195:large blue handkerchief, such as the Invalides use, was folded into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8198:with the needle; she wore a cloak of coarse brown woollen stuff, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8219:they had been friends; there no longer existed any reason for such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8260:influential, a wise elector, and a very severe juryman; he was still a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8310:woman had stood upright, her lofty stature and her frame of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8512:warm them up, easily become monstrous. There was in the woman a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8532:This Thénardier, if he himself was to be believed, had been a soldier—a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8548:later, a sort of pensive attitude towards her husband, a scamp of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8681:because, large as they were, it seemed as though one beheld in them a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8735:the production of “black goods.” Towards the close of 1815 a man, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8826:expense an infant school, a thing then almost unknown in France, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8827:fund for aiding old and infirm workmen. As his factory was a centre, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8894:an adventurer.” When they saw him repulse society, they said, “He is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8921:thoughtful visage of a philosopher. He habitually wore a hat with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8952:it and the granary and inundating the cracks in the floor with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:8976:exterminated. How many men resemble the nettle!” He added, after a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9012:“Monsieur le Maire, pray show us your chamber. It is said to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9023:room, and that it was a hermit’s cave, a mysterious retreat, a hole, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9050:earth, where nothing is complete. To have continually at one’s side a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9087:soul. One sees nothing, but one feels that one is adored. It is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9104:raising the quarantine against M. Madeleine, the probable relative of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9163:It frequently happened that when M. Madeleine was passing along a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9167:followed him with his eyes until he disappeared, with folded arms and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9206:education. Social education, when well done, can always draw from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9249:fold, as on the muzzle of a wild beast. Javert, serious, was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9297:forehead, a baleful glance, a threatening chin, enormous hands, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9318:but it seemed to be of no importance to him. He did not even put a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9395:“They have gone for the nearest, to Flachot’s place, where there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9536:sisters of charity. On the following morning the old man found a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9541:charity and of his priest, got the good man a place as gardener in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9582:When Fantine saw that she was making her living, she felt joyful for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9594:she only knew how to sign her name, she was obliged to write through a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9607:does she send out to purchase six sheets of note paper, when she has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9674:All this took time. Fantine had been at the factory for more than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9866:out of bravado and with rage in her heart. He was a miserable scamp, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9912:are laughing; if you want to sell me your palettes, I will give you a
tests/les_miserables.txt:9955:She remained thoughtful, and began her work. At the expiration of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10046:She had no longer a bed; a rag which she called her coverlet, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10062:Father Madeleine, but made no complaint. She sewed seventeen hours a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10116:and all the ocean sweep over her! What matters it to her? She is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10140:species: impotent men, parasites, cyphers, who have a little land, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10162:At that period a dandy was composed of a tall collar, a big cravat, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10166:other and running up to the shoulder; and a pair of trousers of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10178:It was the period of the conflict of the republics of South America
tests/les_miserables.txt:10188:amusing himself by tormenting a creature who was prowling about in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10246:On arriving at the police station, which was a low room, warmed by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10267:was exercising without control, but subject to all the scruples of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10339:cough, stammering softly with a voice of agony. Great sorrow is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10342:and tenderly kissed the police agent’s coat. She would have softened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10412:that. I did not hear aright. It cannot have been that monster of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10630:Javert received the blow erect, full in the face, in his breast, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10824:had brought about a sudden suppression of perspiration, as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10862:In the meantime Thénardier did not “let go of the child,” and gave a
tests/les_miserables.txt:10939:half-way between that of a soldier in the presence of his officer and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11187:has his previous conviction against him. To climb a wall, to break a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11224:Renée le Bossé’s, and you will prepare documents. But I am giving you a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11306:kindness which consists in upholding a woman of the town against a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11365:sur M. But the small portion of them which became known left such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11380:Sister Perpétue was an ordinary villager, a sister of charity in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11414:voice which would have equally edified a confessional or enchanted a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11488:From the town-hall he betook himself to the extremity of the town, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11495:parish in which M. Madeleine resided. The curé was, it was said, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11507:M. Madeleine found Master Scaufflaire at home, engaged in stitching a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11555:little white horse—you may have seen him pass occasionally; he is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11658:“Of course, Monsieur le Maire,” replied Scaufflaire; then, scratching a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11764:and staring; and through his window-panes he saw the reddish gleam of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11961:his actions, all that he had made up to that day had been nothing but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:11994:very brink of the abyss. He distinctly perceived in the darkness a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12080:being who has not done it. It may even be said that the word is never a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12280:egotism, but it is egotism all the same. What if I were to think a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12314:aroused and animated; factories and shops are multiplied; families, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12326:perhaps, but just at bottom, no one knows whom, a thief, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12334:and sacrifice the innocent, which save an old vagabond who has only a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12342:unspeakable folly! Let us put it at the worst: suppose that there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12366:which was floating abroad in the night; if it halts and descends on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12386:He fumbled in his pocket, drew out his purse, opened it, and took out a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12440:He bent over the hearth and warmed himself for a moment. He felt a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12475:“Jean Valjean, there will be around you many voices, which will make a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12547:And do what he would, he always fell back upon the heartrending dilemma
tests/les_miserables.txt:12624:“We were conversing and we met some passers-by. We were talking of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12632:veins on it. In his hand he held a switch which was as supple as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12801:with those long, offensive axles which keep other vehicles at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12820:enveloped in a mantle. The wheel of the tilbury received quite a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12902:excellent beast had travelled five leagues in two hours, and had not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:12960:threshold. He came, examined the wheel and made a grimace like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13043:The wheelwright had seen at the first glance that the tilbury was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13231:“Monsieur,” said the woman, “my boy tells me that you wish to hire a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13277:At the moment when the cart moved off, he admitted that he had felt, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13436:“That is different; but go to the inn all the same, and get an extra
tests/les_miserables.txt:13471:This caused another loss of twenty minutes; but they set out again at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13476:gleams in the clouds; a strong breeze which blew in from the sea
tests/les_miserables.txt:13530:again and shone like stars. It seems as though, at the approach of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13752:at least? he will be here to-morrow, will he not? to-morrow will be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:13855:led the little white horse to the stable; then he opened the door of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14024:“Oh! this one is a clear case also. It is about a sort of blackguard; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14124:Although he did not suspect the fact, the mayor of M. sur M. enjoyed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14171:cabinet of severe aspect, lighted by two wax candles, placed upon a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14176:President’s chair.” These words were mingled in his thoughts with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14248:He could not take his eyes from it. From time to time he advanced a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14364:lasted for three hours: for three hours that crowd had been watching a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14366:or profoundly subtle, gradually bending beneath the weight of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14367:terrible likeness. This man, as the reader already knows, was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14372:entire debate; the accusation said: “We have in our grasp not only a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14411:and its majestic stride; a tongue in which a husband is called _a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14413:civilization_; the king, _the monarch_; Monseigneur the Bishop, _a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14493:the crime committed against Little Gervais, etc., etc.; it is such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14594:random came like hiccoughs, and to each he added the gesture of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14661:strolled along the highways; I know nothing different. When I was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14685:Police-Inspector Javert, recalled by his duties to the capital of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14716:the door of the witnesses’ room opened. The usher, accompanied by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14737:has degraded, there may remain, when the divine mercy permits it, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14741:man, whom a word from you may ruin; on the other hand, justice, which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14763:galleys of Toulon, whence he had been brought for this case. He was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14861:All heads were raised: the sensation was indescribable; there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14877:they did not know him. Cochepaille, who was intimidated, made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14902:disturbs the audience inspires us, like yourselves, only with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:14937:was stupid; I became vicious: I was a block of wood; I became a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15123:The sister felt chilled by something strange of which she caught a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15314:travellers in their parts. That inn of theirs is a sort of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15588:years, without being able to throw him. This arrest was not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15723:In the corner of the room stood an old iron bedstead, which was in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15726:bed, in a twinkling wrenched off the head-piece, which was already in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15845:The portress raised her eyes, and stood there with gaping mouth, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:15876:without opening the big gates. He had, and always carried about him, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16096:the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l’Alleud, which has the form of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16116:the wind. At one corner of the inn, beside a pool in which a flotilla
tests/les_miserables.txt:16190:jumping, and a turkey spreading its tail, a chapel surmounted by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16259:inaccessible steps are solid in their niches. All the rest resembles a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16333:the eye is lost in a deep cylinder of brick which is filled with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16338:table for all wells in Belgium. The slab has here been replaced by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16345:The door of this house opens on the courtyard. Upon this door, beside a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16368:It slopes downwards, is planted with gooseberry bushes, choked with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16385:hundred, intrepid and with no shelter save the currant-bushes, took a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16424:Bauduin killed, Foy wounded, conflagration, massacre, carnage, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16491:delusion of a breath of adventure? Had he become—a grave matter in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16522:subject; this history, moreover, has been finished, and finished in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16568:Two hostile troops on a field of battle are two wrestlers. It is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16573:ground; an unevenness in the ground, a chance turn in the landscape, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16614:Jerusalem murdered lessens Titus, tyranny follows the tyrant. It is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16624:Every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16666:Braine-l’Alleud, thence on Hal; nothing easier. With the exception of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16667:few incidents this attack succeeded. Papelotte was taken; La
tests/les_miserables.txt:16729:to fix, absolutely, the form of that horrible cloud which is called a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16735:Nevertheless, at a certain moment in the afternoon the battle came to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16813:called the “Museum of Waterloo.” Besides this, Wellington had, behind a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16841:intersected by the back road of the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16891:the enemy was not making any movement. Nothing was stirring; not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16906:chair brought to him from the farm of Rossomme, seated himself, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:16956:that profound silence, like that which heralds the beginning of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17005:pyramid of earth, surmounted by the lion, rises to-day, there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17027:curves of the landscape, are connected by a road about a league and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17034:appropriated for the monumental hillock. This road was, and still is, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17097:hundred men overthrown in a still shorter time about La
tests/les_miserables.txt:17167:There were three thousand five hundred of them. They formed a front a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17192:to the breeze, formed in columns by divisions, descended, by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17211:had but one soul. Each column undulated and swelled like the ring of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17281:almost affirm that Napoleon’s catastrophe originated in that sign of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17330:squares at a gallop. The cuirassiers had not had even the time for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17368:cavalry, they were a tempest. Each square was a volcano attacked by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17434:Wellington’s situation had grown worse. This strange battle was like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17472:clustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment; such and such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17484:wounded, Barne wounded, Delancey killed, Van Meeren killed, Ompteda
tests/les_miserables.txt:17582:deployed before Lobau’s corps, the cavalry of Prince William of Prussia
tests/les_miserables.txt:17639:with uniform unbuttoned, one of his epaulets half cut off by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17658:The army yielded suddenly on all sides at once,—Hougomont, La
tests/les_miserables.txt:17766:contracting its four walls. The fugitives pausing breathless for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17776:respite. These combatants had around them something in the nature of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:17916:sword. Neither England, nor Germany, nor France is contained in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18000:that his army, the army which fought on the 18th of June, 1815, was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18005:Wellington so great is to belittle England. Wellington is nothing but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18044:front for such a number of combatants. Napoleon three-quarters of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18061:At night, moreover, a sort of visionary mist arises from it; and if a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18102:by the natural reaction of things, was forced to be liberal, and that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18131:marshals’ staffs of Europe, including, it is said, the staff of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18251:that war, then that peace? All that darkness did not trouble for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18328:detestable maxim, _Live on the enemy!_ produced this leprosy, which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18463:“Come,” said he, “it’s only a dead body. I prefer a spook to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18698:which is all the more curious and all the more precious, because a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18704:no rarity to encounter at nightfall, in secluded nooks of the forest, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18743:sometimes a spectre folded in four like a sheet of paper in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18769:nowhere, the administration employed him at reduced rates as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18788:reassured thereby. These encounters seemed to cause Boulatruelle a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18920:Albert, enrolling himself in that crusade of kings against people as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18967:means. The words _passive obedience_ indicate this. An army is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18974:idea slain to order. They went astray, in their innocence, to such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:18983:thrones. It is not permitted to fall asleep, either in the shadow of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19018:Brest or Toulon. The vessels in process of construction are under a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19070:violent equinoctial gale had come up, which had first staved in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19092:motion; the man swayed back and forth at the end of that rope, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19105:seen. There are moments when a bit of rope, a pole, the branch of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19143:In the meantime, the convict had succeeded in lowering himself to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19181:board of the _Orion_, on his return from rendering assistance to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19224:large houses, the aristocracy, of which the Thénardier tavern formed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19252:little district a noisy and joyous life. In order to play the part of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19282:ten pieces were reckoned on there have been twelve. They have yielded a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19290:“Are we responsible for what is in the sacks? We find in them a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19301:In a space between two windows a mower, who was seated at table with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19357:lady peep through the ogress at times, in a very queer way, the idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:19359:This Thénardier female was like the product of a wench engrafted on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19376:and, singularly enough, Saint Augustine. He declared that he had “a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19424:Thénardier, who was, above all, an astute and well-balanced man, was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19434:are always ready to cast upon the first person who comes to hand, as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19450:constant magnetic action. A word was sufficient for him, sometimes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19470:children, and who did not fear any one except her husband. She was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19481:It will be understood that the word _inn-keeper_ is here employed in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19548:lugubrious air of an old woman. Her eye was black in consequence of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19597:“Oh, yes, sir!” said she, “the horse has had a drink; he drank out of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19713:a vision. It was joy, splendor, riches, happiness, which appeared in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19770:time she caught the flicker of a candle through the crack of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19932:but she dared not weep, so afraid was she of the Thénardier, even at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19983:least eccentric at that epoch; a large waistcoat with pockets of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19993:favor any one who observed him attentively. His lip contracted with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:19999:threatening; the most had been made of its knots, and it had received a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20143:nearly superfluous, however; for, as we have already said, it was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20506:had seated himself at a table, on which Cosette made haste to place a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20524:pressing her knees one against the other. Her entire clothing was but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20550:moments as though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20667:stuffs did not detract from the coquetry of arrangement. There was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20713:order. But that a man with such a hat should permit himself such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20714:desire, and that a man with such a coat should permit himself to have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20843:clothe, to deck, to dress, to undress, to redress, to teach, scold a
tests/les_miserables.txt:20968:the doll belonging to “these young ladies.” A czarina who should see a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21081:daybreak, with strange beams of joy. What she felt at that moment was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21280:As for the traveller, he had deposited his cudgel and his bundle in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21308:A door which stood open near Cosette’s pallet permitted a view of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21335:another object. He looked at it, and recognized a wooden shoe, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21448:To present such a bill to a man who had so completely the air “of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21577:sous for his supper. As for the child, I must discuss that matter a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21609:consent to it. I shall miss that child. I saw her first when she was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21641:the saying goes, to the very depths of the conscience, replied in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21654:by certain signs, Thénardier comprehended that he had to deal with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21718:known what it was to take refuge under a mother’s shadow and under a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21755:had begun to open their doors beheld a poorly clad old man leading a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21830:All at once he paused and dealt himself a blow on his forehead like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21844:surface, he had all the requisites for a blackguard. He was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21903:case I can only give the child up to the person who shall bring me a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21920:drew from it, not the handful of bills which Thénardier expected, but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:21966:owed you one hundred and twenty francs. In February, you sent her a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22047:was not ironed, as we have seen. He swam under water until he reached a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22057:towards Grand-Villard, near Briançon, in the Hautes-Alpes. It was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22068:remembered that already, during his preceding escape, he had made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22119:place where there was some one; it was a boulevard of the great city, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22130:sawdust, and shavings, on which stood a large dog, barking; then a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22137:and between two garden walls, there could be seen, at that epoch, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22138:mean building, which, at the first glance, seemed as small as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22173:replaced with boards nailed on perpendicularly; so that what began as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22267:discover; a melancholy problem which has never been elucidated, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22273:the scaffold, that miserable and shameful Place de Grève of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22313:been committed, had something terrible about it. One almost had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22345:the frequent passage of vehicles enlarges streets. The symptoms of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22348:grow longer, even where there are as yet no pedestrians. One morning,—a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22489:this kind man. She felt that which she had never felt before—a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22583:future stretching out before him, illuminated by Cosette as by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22597:overpowering him; even the memory of the Bishop probably suffered a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22647:inquisitiveness peculiar to envious persons, scrutinized Jean Valjean a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22659:doubt. The old woman saw him fumble in his pocket and draw thence a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22687:Not only the needles, thread, and scissors which she had seen, but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22724:instinct of self-preservation,—restrained Jean Valjean from uttering a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22791:staircase, a ray of light from without made it stand out like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:22878:existed. It is possible that when the author conducts his readers to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23064:narrow and seemed made expressly for him. Before entering it he cast a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23171:Porcherons, la Galiote, les Célestins, les Capucins, le Mail, la
tests/les_miserables.txt:23222:surmises, which so closely resembled proofs, whirled suddenly, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23242:as the Rue Petit-Picpus, by houses of mean aspect; on the left by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23285:led from one central pipe to all these little basins sketched out a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23300:be done with Cosette? How was she to be drawn up to the top of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23416:over which this rope ran was fastened underneath the lantern in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23468:All at once she heard Jean Valjean’s voice crying to her, though in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23484:on top of the wall as far as the cant. As he had guessed, there stood a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23524:Jean Valjean had beside him the building whose roof had served him as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23531:distinguishable, one of which, much encumbered, seemed to serve as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23575:All at once, in the midst of this profound calm, a fresh sound arose; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23659:He quitted the ruin and crept along the large building, seeking a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23675:serpent which undulated over the floor, that this sinister form had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23710:Cold, anxiety, uneasiness, the emotions of the night, had given him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23734:heard for some time a peculiar noise. It was like the tinkling of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23801:He listened to her breathing: she still breathed, but with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23808:It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside a
tests/les_miserables.txt:23821:The man’s head was bent down, and he did not see him approaching. In a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24098:Valjean had made him, Javert, burst into laughter, by asking him for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24126:glittering eye of justice. The last thing that owls desire is to have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24128:hundred francs which he had received? He turned squarely round, put a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24200:forever as _among malefactors of the most dangerous sort_, was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24219:liberty was a grave matter. The police agents were afraid of making a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24248:papers; but if the man was not Jean Valjean, and if this man was not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24283:with the information which he required: “Have you seen a man with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24356:formidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24368:The greatest follies are often composed, like the largest ropes, of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24427:if one ventured to ascend it, one crossed a first landing, then a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24436:flowers, at fifteen sous the roll. A white, dull light fell from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24454:pierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24479:a sort of theatre-box, narrow, furnished with two old chairs, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24483:grating of it was not of gilded wood, as at the opera; it was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24493:were always closed. At the expiration of a few moments one heard a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24500:Hardly the sound of a breath was audible. It seemed as though it were a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24523:mist mingled with a vapor from the tomb, a sort of terrible peace, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24540:Nevertheless, there was something beyond that shadow; there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24588:Saint-Benoît, mounts to the chin. A robe of serge with large sleeves, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24787:her stall that she can rise. The _coulpe_ or _peccavi_, is made for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24851:made me shudder from head to foot.” They were dressed in blue, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24876:severity on that point was carried. One day a young girl received a
tests/les_miserables.txt:24983:“There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25019:Each of its four corners had received, in the language of the pupils, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25166:of her companions, stepped out of the ranks, and said, “Monseigneur, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25196:spectral grace. Wherever she entered, people felt cold. One day a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25197:sister, on seeing her pass, said to another sister, “She passes for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25202:called _L’Œil de Bœuf_. It was in this gallery, which had only a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25226:there was of the highest, since she spoke thus familiarly of so great a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25273:handkerchief. Two were still bolder. They found means to climb on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25309:wear the magnificent habit of her order, which was a white robe with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25322:About 1820 or 1821, Madame de Genlis, who was at that time editing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25329:entered. She departed at the end of six or eight months, alleging as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25363:folded in such a manner as to form, not, as in ordinary churches, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25422:fond of making use of the pupils in this quarter. She usually took a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25461:drawing-master, M. Ansiaux, whom the letter, of which we have perused a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25485:was a juxtaposition of hybrid constructions which, viewed from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25495:was the public entrance of the church. The elbow of the gibbet was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25540:Petit-Picpus was in former times, and since we have ventured to open a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25567:which existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne. When a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25619:white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts of frames, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25853:adopted the expedient of smiling at them. There has come into fashion a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25871:Each of these dungeons has the remains of an iron door, a vault, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25879:for him to stand upright in. A human being was put inside, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:25933:theorists, who are in other respects people of intelligence, have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26027:Thence it results that, in the preceding book, I have spoken of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26031:militant policy, on condition that the monastery shall be absolutely a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26036:Wherever there is a community, there is a commune; where there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26039:transfiguration! Liberty suffices to transform the monastery into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26148:impregnated to some extent with fog, has fancied that it has worked a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26202:confrontation; such is the function of real philosophy. Morality is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26238:abuses, insists on being stated and taken into account. Cenobitism is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26297:Without invalidating anything that we have just said, we believe that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26299:the priest and the philosopher agree. _We must die_. The Abbé de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:26399:already seen, supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese before a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26454:replies: “After what he did for me, would I save him if he were a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26483:causes, failed in his business, he had descended to the calling of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26566:church.—You see, they play. At recreation hours it suffices to have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26633:that terrible street made him shudder. You make your way out of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26650:inform the municipality that the dead-doctor is to come here and view a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26672:will leave her for whatever time is required with a good old friend, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26674:has a little bed. I will shout in the fruit-seller’s ear, that she is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26694:has signed the passport for paradise, the undertaker’s company sends a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26720:privilege, it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall. There is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26806:peasants who have assurance. A certain clever ignorance constitutes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26831:thought a great deal of him. Old, lame, blind to everything, probably a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26842:beds, because of the moon, and he wound up as follows: “That he had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26843:brother”—(the prioress made a movement),—“a brother no longer young”—(a
tests/les_miserables.txt:26883:The two interlocutors seemed preoccupied. We will present a
tests/les_miserables.txt:27573:Another silence. Fauchelevent made, with his left hand, that sort of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:27687:Then he explained to Jean Valjean that this was his recompense for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:27903:An escape is a cure. What does not a man undergo for the sake of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:27966:am sure of getting you out of the grave. The grave-digger is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28010:mourning-coach, in which could be seen a priest in his surplice, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28044:the gate with his key; the grave-digger stepped out, but had to pay a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28048:embarrassed the symmetry of the administration. It was suppressed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28259:And he added, with the satisfaction of a serious man who is turning a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28266:turned into a narrow one, entered the waste land, and plunged into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28307:stall in the market of the Rue de Sèvres. You know? the Umbrella
tests/les_miserables.txt:28326:One of the small front wheels of the hearse had run up a little on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28423:All at once, he heard over his head a sound which seemed to him to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28749:these excesses of emotion, not knowing whether he had to do with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28826:had stiffened himself in that coffin, and had become a little like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28843:“How well everything is going!” said Fauchelevent; “what a capital idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:28875:packing-case—a coffin, perhaps—took the place of a commode, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28877:a bed, the floor served instead of tables and chairs. In a corner, on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28883:had been crying, the children had probably been beaten; traces of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:28943:of those two words, pronounced with a certain accent in the ear of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29096:a coffin containing a body in the Petit-Picpus, and a coffin without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29103:prioress recounted the affair to his Grace, making something of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29105:the convent, the archbishop mentioned it with approval, and in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29111:Della Genga; it contained these lines: “It appears that there is in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29147:locked up these garments, plus the stockings and the shoes, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29259:allowed, as a great favor, linen trousers in the hottest weather, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29318:Two strongholds of slavery; but in the first, deliverance possible, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29327:hatred, desperate viciousness, a cry of rage against human society, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29529:A funeral passes by. Among those who accompany the dead there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29568:This being bawls and scoffs and ridicules and fights, has rags like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29667:serves any purpose except to raise mushrooms, and which is closed, on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29680:unexpected moment, behind a meagre hedge, or in the corner of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29779:complaisance in the matter. A man kept his hat on in the presence of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29910:the carriage gate of No. 69. “Why are you doing that at the gate?” a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29928:(All these words: traitor, malicious, great, ridiculous, have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29980:The gamin is a grace to the nation, and at the same time a disease; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:29991:and then, those who govern under the superintendence of the French idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:30002:Saint-Antoine, an Asinarium, the Sorbonne, a Pantheon, the Pantheon, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30016:l’Etoile, the sword-eater of Pœcilus encountered by Apuleius is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30024:jeers in the Café Anglais at Nomentanus the fast liver, Hermogenus is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30048:Gascon pun. It mingles Diogenes, Job, and Jack-pudding, dresses up a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30052:Although Plutarch says: _the tyrant never grows old_, Rome, under Sylla
tests/les_miserables.txt:30106:of the Judgment Day, and to-morrow into the reed-flute! Paris has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30107:sovereign joviality. Its gayety is of the thunder and its farce holds a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30192:abandon them for that? Would you turn their distress into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30244:He was a boisterous, pallid, nimble, wide-awake, jeering, lad, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30293:should chance to come and inquire for a Pole or an Italian, or even a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30321:last at the end of the corridor. The cell next to it was occupied by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30391:possesses specimens of Asia and Africa on a small scale. The cat is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30419:great agility. In addition to a library adjoining his chamber, he had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30424:inherited it from a grim maternal great-aunt, who had died a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30431:existence. He was a connoisseur of painting. He had in his chamber a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30440:into his fobs. He said authoritatively: “The French Revolution is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30591:age of eighty-three, by the maid of Madame la Présidente Jacquin, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30592:son, a real child of love, who became a Chevalier of Malta and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30607:whom but little memory remains, was a peaceable miser, who, being a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30656:not swerve from it. “The day is vulgar,” said he, “and deserves only a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30680:of the town-hall, to be “Madame la Préfète,”—all this had created a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30719:sacred heart,” remained for hours in contemplation before a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30729:Vaubois, perfect in her style, was the ermine of stupidity without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30738:stupor of a life that was finished, and which had never had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30782:his own neighborhood, in the Rue Férou, with Madame la Baronne de T., a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30815:quatrains, with distiches even; thus, upon the Dessolles ministry, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:30827:point to the same wrath in inverse sense. They sang their little _Ça
tests/les_miserables.txt:30922:tanned by the sun, his face nearly black and his hair nearly white, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31020:equal aptitude for handling the sabre or the musket as a soldier, or a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31242:his back turned to the door, apparently for the purpose of allowing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31274:only antique. A woman was called _Madame la Générale. Madame la
tests/les_miserables.txt:31298:to a breath; the newspapers, agreeing with the salons, seemed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31633:that occasion, and knelt down, without paying any special heed, upon a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31668:of warden. I knew that unhappy gentleman a little, too. He had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31760:he had expected to find only a chaos of shadows, he had beheld, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31852:which is twelve hundred times larger than the earth, glowing like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31860:him like a breath, and whispered in his ear; he gradually got into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31925:Jacobite and the Royalist, when he had become thoroughly a
tests/les_miserables.txt:31958:and alleged his studies, his lectures, the examinations, etc., as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32009:not have been sorry to thrust her spectacles into the affair. Tasting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32107:“The wicked fellow!” exclaimed his aunt. “Ah! your cousin is not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32108:steady lad like yourself. To think that he is to pass the night in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32120:Here an event occurred to Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder,—an idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:32216:much touched by the ten louis, and he thought he saw a chance for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32298:“The rendezvous is appointed outside,” said Théodule. “Let’s have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32309:the grave, on a little swelling which marked the head, there stood a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32412:chilled as by the breath of a death’s-head. They did not exchange a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32480:the old Royalist the effect of the puffs of air from a forge upon a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32531:with a smile that was almost calm: “A baron like this gentleman, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32705:of liberty. His speech was harshly inspired, and had the thrill of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32752:he feared lest the present poverty of method, the paltriness from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32804:confidence, and blamed the Revolution for having caused the fall of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32864:protest of right against the deed persists forever. The theft of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32898:the first from what it was in the second. There was in Tholomyès a
tests/les_miserables.txt:32909:Bahorel was a good-natured mortal, who kept bad company, brave, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33002:Bossuet was slowly directing his steps towards the profession of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33011:tongue in the mirror. He affirmed that man becomes magnetic like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33049:addition, boxing and foot-fencing and some dances; and he was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33051:was inordinately homely: the prettiest boot-stitcher of that day, Irma
tests/les_miserables.txt:33071:However, this sceptic had one fanaticism. This fanaticism was neither a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33140:somnambulism, a two-wheeled vehicle proceeding through the place, at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33176:Marius thought he had encountered a wag, the beginning of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33200:“It was Blondeau who was making the call. You know Blondeau, he has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33233:the door for the purpose of flight. The professor gazed at me with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33243:reply: ‘Present!’ Then Blondeau gazes at me, with the gentleness of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33338:Courfeyrac put no questions to him. He did not even think of such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33396:bourgeoisie must be left at peace on that score. Bewigged tragedy has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33470:patching up of everything with big words! a kitchen is a laboratory, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33479:pride. Caligula made a horse a consul; Charles II. made a knight of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33494:brave man rubs elbows with the braggart; he who says very pious says a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33558:the rag-pickers are sybarites; Diogenes would have loved to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33580:me to say to you? Man is evil, man is deformed; the butterfly is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33590:of law behind the scenes, and who was plunged more than waist high in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33643:neat. He has the attack, no wasted feints, wrist, dash, lightning, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33752:charter is a mask; the lie lurks beneath it. A people which accepts a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33769:mounting together and crossing from all points of the room, produced a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33802:At this name of Waterloo, Marius, who was leaning his elbows on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33902:grand army, to make its legions fly forth over all the earth, as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:33969:many steps which had brought him nearer to his father, to now take a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34047:“You will then have only a pair of trousers, a waistcoat, a hat and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34166:nights without sleep, evenings without a candle, a hearth without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34181:crucible into which destiny casts a man, whenever it desires a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34193:Firm and rare natures are thus created; misery, almost always a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34205:who had a timid yet angry air, who, on entering, removed his hat from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34229:supposed to live in Courfeyrac’s room, which was decent, and where a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34240:agitated. She listened, and the old man was saying: “If you were not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34257:He had passed the worst straits; the narrow pass was opening out a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34259:will, he had managed to draw from his work about seven hundred francs a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34282:presided, he gave a sou to the waiter, and Madam Rousseau gave him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34291:twenty sous a day; which made three hundred and sixty-five francs a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34294:francs, Marius was fed, lodged, and waited on. His clothing cost him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34388:snappishness and boxes on the ear; but, this child once gone, he felt a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34404:he was still merry and violent as of old, but his merriment had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34419:bourgeois replied with a sigh, that he was a sad case, and giving a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34485:This is what had happened with Marius. To tell the truth, he inclined a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34522:dignity; it was a fine and complete unhappiness converted into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34523:repulsive and ridiculous state of torture: something like the case of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34602:approached a cannon in his life, even at the Invalides. He had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34604:teeth, either in his mouth or his mind, a trembling in every limb, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34611:His servant was also a sort of innocent. The poor good old woman was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34641:abdicated the functions of warden, gave up Saint-Sulpice, sold not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34653:Austerlitz, where, for fifty crowns a year, he got three rooms and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34665:Marius, were admitted to view the thatched cottage at Austerlitz, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34672:is a far-off thing to them. There results from such concentration a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34728:Courfeyrac and sought out M. Mabeuf. Very rarely, however; twice a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34753:He said sometimes, but without bitterness: “Men are so made that in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34767:point above all, that his pity was directed. Now he preferred an idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:34878:reasoned as follows: “The old druid has not sunk all his money in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34896:encounters, stammered with some timidity: “Good day, uncle,”—and made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34918:Jacobinism leads. I will bet anything you like, a million against a
tests/les_miserables.txt:34992:pests; all, even the _Drapeau Blanc!_ At bottom, Martainville was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35099:wears his beard, Marius does not wear his own beard.” The other was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35158:that as no one knew them under any other title, this nickname became a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35179:the alley. One day, at last, he returned thither once more; it was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35188:it was no longer the same girl. The person whom he now beheld was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35282:What he had just seen was no longer the ingenuous and simple eye of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35297:which she captures hearts without either wishing or knowing it. It is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35337:mould, and one of whose hips was missing. Near the basin there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35358:At that moment, he was thinking that the _Manuel du Baccalauréat_ was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35361:analyzed therein as masterpieces of the human mind. There was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35384:the right or to the left, with his hand thrust into his coat like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35482:She was decidedly a marvellous beauty. The only remark approaching a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35484:gaze, which was melancholy, and her smile, which was merry, gave a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35625:stations behind the trees and the pedestals of the statues with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35628:he remained motionless by the half-hour together in the shade of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35633:the white-haired man, she bent upon Marius all the reveries of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35653:bench which “M. Leblanc and his daughter” had just quitted, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35661:U was evidently the Christian name. “Ursule!” he thought, “what a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35696:nursery, flung itself on the alley, enveloped the young girl in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35731:soldier’s cross of Saint-Louis, and adorned, in addition, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35732:coat-sleeve, which had no arm within it, with a silver chin and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35760:Appetite grows with loving. To know that her name was Ursule was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35767:the Luxembourg when M. Leblanc came thither alone. He now committed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35771:She lived in the Rue de l’Ouest, in the most unfrequented spot, in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35909:Human societies all have what is called in theatrical parlance, _a
tests/les_miserables.txt:35924:Beneath the social construction, that complicated marvel of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36043:this stifling ceiling, turned the leaves of a book nor unfolded a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36083:muscles were of marble, his biceps of brass, his breath was that of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36085:thought one beheld the Farnese Hercules clad in duck trousers and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36092:idle force. He was an assassin through coolness. He was thought to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36101:had played in vaudeville at Saint-Mihiel. He was a man of purpose, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36114:had lost them as one loses his handkerchief. Babet read the papers, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36148:his hat was curled up on the left side, in order to make room for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36159:outstretched arms in the presence of this wretch, with his face in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36162:boulevard wenches surrounding him, his cravat knowingly tied, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36363:On another occasion, he had an encounter which produced on him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36365:Boulevard des Invalides, a man dressed like a workingman and wearing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36552:    the pretious favor of your simpaties and to interest yourself in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36557:    places. The comic, the serious, the unexpected, are mingled in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36702:emaciated, slender creature; there was nothing but a chemise and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36703:petticoat upon that chilled and shivering nakedness. Her girdle was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36720:sunlight which is extinguished under hideous clouds at dawn on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36746:sealed it was still moist. The message could not have come from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36779:had, as we have said, but very rare occasion to see, to even catch a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36802:constituted, two miserable beings who were neither girls nor women, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:36932:meet you here on the staircase, and then I often see you going to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37129:sprang up; he had just perceived, near the top, close to the ceiling, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37167:had a leprous aspect, and were covered with seams and scars, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37193:the aperture through which Marius was gazing, a colored engraving in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37195:large letters, was the inscription: THE DREAM. This represented a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37216:Near the table, upon which Marius descried a pen, ink, and paper, sat a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37217:man about sixty years of age, small, thin, livid, haggard, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37238:and the size, which was the antique 12mo of reading-rooms, betrayed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37420:here: I entered the church, he was in his usual place, I made him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37532:The mother, who had not said a word so far, now rose and demanded in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37533:dull, slow, languid voice, whence her words seemed to emerge in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37695:framed in a bonnet of violet velvet, her figure was concealed beneath a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37806:who lay in her bed with a stupid and dejected air, and said to her in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37815:all torn at that! In the depths of winter! I can’t go out for lack of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37820:sir! Elmire would bestow alms on Bélisaire! But no, nothing! And not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37880:“My benefactor!” exclaimed Jondrette, overwhelmed. And he added, in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:37899:Jondrette darted an annihilating look at his daughter, accompanied by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38043:alias Bigrenaille, whom Courfeyrac had once pointed out to him as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38046:Bigrenaille, figured later on in many criminal trials, and became a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38404:I want to have my turn, so I do, come now! before I die! I want to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38489:“This rind is too large for me. Never mind,” he added, “he did a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38650:These two persons were strangers to him; one was a bearded man in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38722:The clerk introduced him into the commissary’s office. There stood a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38923:Wait until they begin to put their project into execution; you are a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38963:“One would say, to see all these snow-flakes fall, that there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:38965:sight of Marius coming up the street towards the barrier with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39103:He heard the beating of his arteries as one hears the ticking of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39106:on the other. He was not afraid, but he could not think without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39250:The door opened, and Marius saw the tall Jondrette come in with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39326:probably, also, the mysterious persons of whom Marius had caught a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39356:simple idea. The lair thus lighted up more resembled a forge than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39357:mouth of hell, but Jondrette, in this light, had rather the air of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39370:of Marius, who was dreamy even in the moment of action, it was like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39408:“By the way! Now that I think of it. In this weather, he will come in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39486:recognized the fact, that what he had taken for a shapeless mass was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39601:the midst of that darkness, the vast Jondrette garret lighted by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39670:‘What! a trade?’ Yes! A trade! A simple trade! A bread-winner! What a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39760:old; his white hair contrasting with his blackened face produced a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39775:the manner of a man who is on his guard, “it is some signboard for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39781:“Have you your pocket-book with you? I should be satisfied with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39785:M. Leblanc sprang up, placed his back against the wall, and cast a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39801:glasses from falling off is required, then a special stove is needed, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39803:the paste, according as it is to be used for wood, paper, or stuff, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39901:This old man, who was so firm and so brave in the presence of such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:39979:could at last repay this man for his father’s life, saved amid a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40069:who certainly belonged to rich people, and who had already brought in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40102:“I do not know what you mean to say. You are mistaken in me. I am a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40117:Who has not remarked the fact that odious creatures possess a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40139:here, Mister millionnaire: I have been a solid man, I have held a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40147:“When I think that he has dared to come here and talk to me like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40197:this thing, and in the daub, he actually did recognize a battle, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40202:wine-shop at Montfermeil, it was a resurrection; a tomb had yawned, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40255:wine, descended from the pallet and came reeling up, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40316:The Thénardier obeyed, as the female wolf obeys the male wolf, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40385:in official life the almost bestial mouth which had been foaming but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40387:metamorphosis, and he felt as a man might feel who should behold a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40426:about as much noise at the nearest police station as the snores of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40450:resistance opposed to the first impulse of nature, which is to utter a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40487:expenses of your own—who has not? I don’t want to ruin you, I am not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40706:“Good!” growled Thénardier. “They’re going at a fine pace. At such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:40961:Marius reeled in utter horror, the very ruffians shuddered, hardly a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41128:He had his hat in his hand, and was holding it out to them with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41156:abandoned in all the corners at the moment of flight. In less than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41314:And passing them in review with a glance of a Frederick II. at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41344:where the candle and the writing-materials still remained, drew a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41542:those which precede and those which follow them. They have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41560:which are nothing else than the arrival of a great nation at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41598:did not suspect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41613:ill-tempered look at every development of the nation. To make use of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41750:let him look at Machiavelli. Machiavelli is not an evil genius, nor a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41806:But the first family that comes to hand does not suffice to make a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41938:cut short, the King amounted to more than royalty. Louis Philippe was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41961:fancy or duty; lettered, but not very sensitive to letters; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41984:vanity, to fear; possessing all the forms of personal intrepidity; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:41986:regicides and always smiling. Brave as a grenadier, courageous as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42005:spirit of proceedings and chicanery, the founder and lawyer of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42019:his manners belonged to the old regime and his habits to the new; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42031:out with his umbrella under his arm, and this umbrella long formed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42041:different totals. Democratic right confiscated, progress becomes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42134:not yet sounded for him; the moment has not come to pronounce a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42167:penalty was as good as abolished, and the erection of a scaffold was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42189:and above all things, entirely disinterested; an epitaph penned by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42209:without violence, without any direct action on his part, by virtue of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42231:but those who are in error are so sincerely; a blind man is no more a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42345:by the agency of man, interests combine, unite, and amalgamate in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42417:selfishness, all that does not represent for the human race either a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42623:people by reason of their very audacity. On the 4th of April, 1832, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42839:remarkable point about it was, that the police were not able to seize a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42865:are twenty-five thousand.” He offered his gun, and a neighbor offered a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42902:Then the Army of the Bastilles, a sort of cohort organized on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42918:Rights of Man, the Charbonnière, and The Free Men. All had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:42945:in the southern towns they planted the liberty tree; that is to say, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43356:to Courfeyrac: “I have come to sleep with you.” Courfeyrac dragged a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43363:books, his bed, his table, his commode, and his two chairs loaded on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43402:Moreover, Marius was heart-broken. Everything had plunged through a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43404:again buried in mystery where he wandered fumblingly. He had for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43429:passion. He never said to himself: “What if I were to go to such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43651:that wall covered with scales and leprosy, which rose on the left to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43653:ancient chapel of the ducal residence of La Force, then turned in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43654:dormitory for ruffians, there could still be seen, twelve years ago, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43663:house, was a very cunning and very adroit young spark, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43729:the treasure, he forwards the note to its destination; if it is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43803:discouraged. He had obtained a corner in the Jardin des Plantes, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43838:Near this bench there rose, after the fashion in orchard-gardens, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43839:sort of large chest, of beams and planks, much dilapidated, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43855:in his hand, Father Mabeuf was surveying his plants, and among others a
tests/les_miserables.txt:43872:“Stars everywhere!” thought the old man; “not the tiniest cloud! Not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44277:ground floor, two chambers on the first floor, a kitchen downstairs, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44278:boudoir upstairs, an attic under the roof, the whole preceded by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44289:followed, ended in another door, also with a secret lock which opened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44348:from the hospital and from wretchedness, and who was elderly, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44446:He had himself served by the porters, and gave himself out as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44584:quivering like a nest, sombre like a cathedral, fragrant like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44600:evening, a dreamy vapor exhaled from the garden and enveloped it; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44662:the infinite. Germination is complicated with the bursting forth of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44666:possesses the larger field of vision? Choose. A bit of mould is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44702:returned to virginity and modesty. A justice assisted by a gardener, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44725:etc.; but in all other respects she was utterly ignorant, which is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44746:Now, in this work of education, in this grave matter of preparing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44778:her soul, with an innocent filial passion which made the goodman a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44916:depths of his soul, for having permitted him to be loved thus, he, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44963:Cosette did not hear her father’s reply, but Toussaint’s words caused a
tests/les_miserables.txt:44991:girl’s person, wounded Jean Valjean’s sombre eye. He felt that it was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45057:in every respect, and that she distinguished the difference between a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45164:substratum of war stirred within her. It struck her, and the idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:45216:to the state of her soul. It was a sort of admiration at a distance, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45270:no longer came quite close to them as formerly. He seated himself at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45525:in the Rue Plumet, they had contracted one habit. They sometimes took a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45545:there. It meant solitude to him and liberty to her. There, she became a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45560:near the Barrière du Maine. It was not dawn, it was daybreak; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45564:A lark, which seemed mingled with the stars, was carolling at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45568:dazzlingly brilliant was rising behind that dome and had the air of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45584:between him and her, of the light with which she filled his life, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45595:causeway and the boulevard, at the spot where it branches, they heard a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45610:visible through the dusk as though there were naked swords there, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45725:the lightning. The wagon-load which headed the line had struck up a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45749:Nevertheless, horrors, when grouped together, always end by evolving a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45761:One of the guards, who had a hook on the end of his cudgel, made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45771:redoubled the delight of the street urchins who had hastened up, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45778:catastrophes. He was not looking at a spectacle, he was seeing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45784:which was pursuing him. All at once, he raised his hand to his brow, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45809:a perfect storm of whips and clubs; the convicts bent before it, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45850:uniforms perfectly natural; Jean Valjean donned his uniform of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45866:adorable way and which produces the effect of a cloud drawn over a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45871:She was handling the flower instinctively, innocently, without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:45967:convalescing, and that he appeared to be happy, she experienced a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46021:ruin might prove Gavroche’s salvation. The garden abutted on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46161:He could have told nothing about the other, except that he was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46191:The old man had received the shock, had returned it, and that in such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46218:He was repaid for his conscientious anxiety in the character of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46252:twitchings of a wild beast caught in a snare. He gave a jerk, tried a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46309:of the stones which you will have to take up and replace twenty times a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46311:lock presents itself; the bourgeois has in his pocket a key made by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46312:locksmith. If you wish to pass out, you will be condemned to execute a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46331:to the depth of wretchedness. Woe to the man who desires to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46342:that the worms have eaten before you. You will be a wood-louse in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46344:sucking at nurse less than twenty years ago, and who have, no doubt, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46431:That same week, she noticed a very handsome officer of lancers, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46432:wasp-like waist, a delicious uniform, the cheeks of a young girl, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46532:She mounted rapidly to the first floor, to her own chamber, opened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46552:barefoot. It will be remembered that she was more of a lark than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46764:I been thinking of? It is like the footsteps that I thought I heard a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46819:The reduction of the universe to a single being, the expansion of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46844:seeing each other, they cannot write to each other; they discover a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46880:it is impenetrable. You have beside you a sweeter radiance and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46899:True love is in despair and is enchanted over a glove lost or a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46926:on the passions which belittle man! Honor to the one which makes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:46933:hand, and from time to time, in the darkness, gently caressing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47025:forgotten him? No, never! She was foolish to have thought so for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47029:afresh, and had inflamed her whole being. This note-book was like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47054:she could not manage to conjecture anything, she hoped through a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47382:little fingers could not close very firmly, and they did not keep a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47383:very good hold on the paper. At the corner of the Rue Clocheperce, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47442:The barber in his shop, which was warmed by a good stove, was shaving a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47450:the other five, timidly turned the handle and entered the shop, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47505:“I am making a mistake in the beast; he’s not a whiting, he’s a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47532:In the meanwhile, as he went on up the street, he perceived a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47533:beggar-girl, thirteen or fourteen years old, and clad in so short a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47534:gown that her knees were visible, lying thoroughly chilled under a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47535:porte-cochère. The little girl was getting to be too old for such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47646:The baker, who was the proprietor in person, took up a loaf and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47752:“The bow-wows!” went on Gavroche, “you’ve got a hide the color of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:47815:his hand, and mechanically pulled at the upper part, and the blade of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48025:timber and masonry, bearing on its back a tower which resembled a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48101:two children, somewhat frightened, followed Gavroche without uttering a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48201:condemned, a sort of mendicant colossus, asking alms in vain with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48253:filled up the cavity, so that it was possible to walk upon it as on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48295:Gavroche’s bed was complete; that is to say, it had a mattress, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48636:The hours of the night fled away. Darkness covered the vast Place de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:48718:time, in the first place, to weave a rope, in the second, to mature a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48736:appearance of delicate health and a profoundly premeditated languor, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48762:The New Building contained four dormitories, one above the other, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48764:chimney-flue, probably from some ancient kitchen of the Dukes de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:48807:and by what connivance, he succeeded in procuring, and secreting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48808:bottle of wine, invented, so it is said, by Desrues, with which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48822:thunder shook the doors on their hinges, and created in the prison a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48894:relieve the conscript, he was found asleep on the floor, lying like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:48918:there; the middle one, that nearest the right gable, is barred with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49015:was joined by a second, who walked with the same caution, then by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49036:devil’s fire. And the bobbies will be along instanter. There’s a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49107:encountered, the hope which was vanishing, all urged them to beat a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49346:It engenders a whole world, _la pègre_, for which read _theft_, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49359:history introduced into a work written with the same aim as this39 a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49369:talking their natural language, as the author of _The Last Day of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49408:is!” The thinker who should turn aside from slang would resemble a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49410:like a philologist refusing to examine a fact in language, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49412:be stated to those who are ignorant of the case, that argot is both a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49456:with profound understanding, would designate M. de Montmorency as “a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49459:the sea, “Neptune,” love, “fires,” beauty, “charms,” a horse, “a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49502:To this we reply in one word, only. Assuredly, if the tongue which a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49550:the depths produce ebullitions on the surface. True history being a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49553:Man is not a circle with a single centre; he is an ellipse with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49604:One cloud is dispelled, another forms. There is hardly one day out of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49651:public admit the fact or not has its syntax and its poetry. It is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49709:_rascal, rascalion; pilche_, a case, which comes from _pilcher_, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49751:figures. Metaphor is an enigma, wherein the thief who is plotting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49767:phantasmagories. _Les sorgueuers vont solliciter des gails à la
tests/les_miserables.txt:49801:le momignard_ (brat), _le momacque; les fiques_ (duds), _frusques; la
tests/les_miserables.txt:49832:darkness. The night is called _la sorgue_; man, _l’orgue_. Man is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49837:their liberty as one would speak of his health. A man under arrest is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49851:the day of his death; he calls the head which counsels him in crime _la
tests/les_miserables.txt:49928:called: “to eat the bit.” As though the informer drew to himself a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49970:dishevelled, wringing its arms, forever chained to the rock of night, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:49987:of this tree a fire was burning, over which three hares were roasting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50011:and lilting refrain which we should say had been lighted up by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50021:This was sung in a cellar or in a nook of the forest while cutting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50101:It may be said of it that it created man a second time, by giving him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50128:wholesomeness is such, that on a day of deliverance, a 14th of July, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50171:of the universal aim, in setting a limit to poverty without setting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50178:what is, that is to say, in proportioning enjoyment to effort and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50209:walking and advancing. It seems a victor; this dead body is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50235:blossoming, the near blossoming forth of universal well-being, is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50246:impossibilities to the vulgar herd. It is no less skilful at causing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50247:solution to spring forth from the reconciliation of ideas, than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50381:kerchief, or a lock of her hair, with his lips. For him, Cosette was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50399:At night, when they were there, that garden seemed a living and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50412:accompanies them like a lyre, and what remains is nothing more than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50435:“Oh! Cosette is a very ugly name that was given to me when I was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50453:And the smile that she added made of this dialogue an idyl worthy of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50462:And Marius, in the very heavens, thought he heard a strain sung by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50914:“The railing is old,” interpolated a fifth, who had the voice of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:50969:nothing to be done here. But embrace me, my good little father! It’s a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51135:“As you like, but you shall not enter here. I’m not the daughter of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51215:The six rascals, speechless and gloomy at being held in check by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51301:the heaths, the branches rudely interlaced, the tall grass, exist in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51313:in its vague and shuddering robe, and which seem to them to live with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51417:hold myself in readiness, that he would give me his linen to put in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51493:When his eyes fell again, he saw Cosette smiling at him. The smile of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51738:portrait of his other daughter, who was dead, Madame Pontmercy, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51800:shocked the goodman. Lieutenant Théodule was gay, no doubt, but a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51813:scabbard on the pavement. And then, throwing out your chest like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51822:a grandfather to the very finger-tips, was not in the least a
tests/les_miserables.txt:51839:wadded cloak, which concealed his attire. At home, he never wore a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52052:“You marry! At one and twenty! You have arranged that! You have only a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52053:permission to ask! a formality. Sit down, sir. Well, you have had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52056:since you are a Baron? You can make that agree. The Republic makes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52061:inscription: ‘July 28th, 1830.’ Go take a look at that. It produces a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52199:“Ah, by the way,” interrupted M. Gillenormand, “you really have not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52234:that little girl of the iron railing in the Rue Plumet. In a garden, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52240:right thing at your age. I like you better as a lover than as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52295:struck by lightning, without the power to speak or breathe, as though a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52436:point-blank by the grandfather to the grandson. But what the drama
tests/les_miserables.txt:52467:rained at times, he did not perceive it; for his dinner, he purchased a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52563:disposed of the text, at a miserable price, as waste paper, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52573:others, _Les Quadrins Historiques de la Bible_, edition of 1560; _La
tests/les_miserables.txt:52574:Concordance des Bibles_, by Pierre de Besse; _Les Marguerites de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:52577:Sieur de Villiers Hotman; a _Florilegium Rabbinicum_ of 1644; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52588:out; he perceived the fact. The wretchedness of a child interests a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52631:increased. Once, however, he had a pleasure. He had gone out with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52651:midnight, in a driving rain-storm. He had sold an Elzevir to pay for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52706:Father Mabeuf went to his room, took his hat, mechanically sought for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52763:it converts everything into projectiles. It makes a cannon-ball of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52766:If we are to believe certain oracles of crafty political views, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52802:credit shaken, industry disconcerted, capital withdrawing, work at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52807:financial result be taken into consideration, it is equivalent to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52845:first place? Here the question of war comes up. Is war less of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52906:Jéhu, the chevaliers of Brassard,—behold an uprising. La Vendée is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52914:other sort of rising is bad; every violent step towards the rear is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:52950:writes the _Annales_ is of the Latin race, let us rather say he is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53037:insurrection is suddenly lost in some quagmire, as the Rhine is in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53071:undergo some undulations before it returns to a state of rest, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53120:bravery of the tribune. He was as eloquent as he had been valiant; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53126:Napoleon’s marshals _in petto_. The treaties of 1815 removed him as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53231:an officer of the 12th Light Infantry saying aloud: “I am a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53269:that a German showed himself named Ludwig Snyder, who died a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53278:of the quay and shouted: “The dragoons!” The dragoons advanced at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53293:closing her window, the third singed the shoulder of an officer; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53294:woman screamed: “They are beginning too soon!” and all at once, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53306:dragoons ply their swords, the crowd disperses in all directions, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53339:In the Rue des Nonaindières, a very well-dressed bourgeois, who had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53344:In the Rue Saint-Pierre-Montmartre, men with bare arms carried about a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53403:a detachment of the National Guard, and fled through the Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:53404:Corderie. The detachment picked up in the barricade a red flag, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53440:Halles, in particular, a network of streets more intricate than a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53443:man killed in the Rue du Ponceau who was searched had on his person a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53446:That which had really undertaken the direction of the uprising was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53449:nearly all the posts of the garrison. In less than three hours, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53477:their barracks. Opposite the passage de l’Ancre a drummer received a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53485:In front of the Cour-Batave, a detachment of National Guards found a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53580:At the time of the insurrection of 1839, in the Rue Saint-Martin a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53605:been to see Marshal Clausel and that the Marshal had said: “Get a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53674:weighed, so to speak, on the head of the procession, there arose a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53730:same spot in the evening, and had left them this discourse by way of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53800:with the vast surrounding uproar. Four gossips were chatting in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53809:own concerns. Three of them were portresses, and the fourth was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53821:This rag-picker was a grateful creature, and she smiled, with what a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53866:“Ah, that’s true,” replied the rag-picker, with deference, “I have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53913:door has a little pointed beard, I have seen him pass every day with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53915:had a gun on his arm. Mame Bacheux says, that last week there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53920:contrive ways of upsetting the world, when we had just begun to get a
tests/les_miserables.txt:53997:“On the day when he gave me my cross, I noticed his beast. It was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54027:arm at Austerlitz, another in the left hip at Jena. At Friedland, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54037:cataplasms, syringes, medicines, I should prefer to receive a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54059:And he picked up something that was rolling about the floor. It was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54102:sort of words which break everything. His waistcoat astounded a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54115:peaceable sheet of paper in the world, a permission to eat eggs, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54193:attracted their attention was that the goodman was walking in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54406:A mob does not go precisely where it intends. We have explained that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54422:near the Halles, notice on their right, opposite the Rue Mondétour, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54438:Saint-Merry. It was on this famous barricade of the Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:54517:were the lodgings of the Hucheloup family. They were reached by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54527:which he called _carpes au gras_. These were eaten by the light of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54570:who entered his establishment, and had rather the mien of seeking a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54574:each other: “Come hear Father Hucheloup growl.” He had been a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54597:The hall on the first floor, where “the restaurant” was situated, was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54600:by a spiral staircase which terminated in the corner of the room at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54689:The others had begun by eating, Grantaire began by drinking. Half a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54807:_Crac_, and behold an aurora borealis, behold a revolution, behold a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54851:gentlewoman, or a petty German prince, furnishing the half of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54858:not insult Mohammedanism, the only religion which is ornamented with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54865:many follies. An old broken lantern which I have just seen at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:54975:“I shall stay here,” said Grantaire. “I prefer a breakfast to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55152:and Courfeyrac turned round, half the street was already barred with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55197:has chromate-of-lead-colored hair, like Titian’s mistress, and she is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55227:would have perished at Thermopylæ with Leonidas, and burned at Drogheda
tests/les_miserables.txt:55291:window into the street, that the government collected a fine of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55404:Guard when they try to mount on the barricade. Pardi! glass is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55410:to another, demanding: “A gun, I want a gun! Why don’t you give me a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55416:“Come now!” said Gavroche, “why not? I had one in 1830 when we had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55479:constituted what Folard in his strategical style would have termed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55491:still ventured at this hour of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55498:coffer was filled with cartridges. When the mob saw the cartridges, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55538:of melted brass and lead, destined to the bullet-mould smoked over a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55865:reader would not see those grand moments of social birth-pangs in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55876:shoulders, who gesticulated and vociferated, and who had the look of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55917:Nevertheless, it is probable that the inhabitants were disturbed, for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:55988:Le Cabuc attempted to resist, but he seemed to have been seized by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56165:hoarse accent of a vibration. Although not one of them was walking, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56193:He took a few steps. Some one passed close to him at a run. Was it a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56237:through which run the Rues Saint-Denis and Saint-Martin, where a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56247:contains. At dusk, every window where a candle was burning received a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56265:where the Parisian circulation had not been annihilated, and where a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56306:decided; hence a redoubled anxiety around that silence whence a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56308:audible, a sound as heart-rending as the death rattle, as menacing as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56380:He thought of that heroic Colonel Pontmercy, who had been so proud a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56390:twenty years, had returned from the great wars with a scarred cheek, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56406:He thought of his father’s sword, which his grandfather had sold to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56442:who were expecting him? Who were in need of him possibly! who were a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56491:arms within a city’s limits without taking the object into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56505:After Æschylus, Thrasybulus; after Diderot, Danton. Multitudes have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56534:immense universal concord, and places the human race once more on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56543:therein lies the marvel of its unity complicated with ubiquity, has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56636:to the insurgents the aspect of a vast black door vaguely opened into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56652:sonorous, approached slowly, without halt, without intermission, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56687:A flash empurpled all the façades in the street as though the door of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:56946:trap. They gazed into the dark barricade as one would gaze into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57012:pile of stones under the barrel, which was instantly staved in, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57071:Marius had had a furnace in his brain all day long; now it was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57335:was another hole, and whence there spurted from moment to moment a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57468:“To Monsieur, Monsieur Marius Pontmercy, at M. Courfeyrac’s, Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:57516:Cosette; she was not mistaken. She had returned to the Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:57661:abrupt advice: “Leave your house,” hurled at Jean Valjean by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57702:on the second floor, and were composed of two sleeping-rooms, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57727:round table, a long sideboard surmounted by a slanting mirror, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57754:Not that he was troubled by this headache, a little nervous crisis, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57832:clearness. This time it was no mirage. The recurrence of a vision is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57851:when it had been necessary; he had sacrificed his inviolability as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57883:the exception of Cosette, that is to say, with the exception of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57893:Jean Valjean; a father in whom there was included even a mother; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57924:an apparent and terrifying calmness, for it is a fearful thing when a
tests/les_miserables.txt:57948:cowardly to come and make eyes at young girls who have beside them a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58019:a form of ice. There is congealment in despair. The alarm bells and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58024:Jean Valjean; Jean Valjean did not stir. Still, at about that moment, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58188:Gavroche engulfed his hand in another of his pockets and drew out a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58281:which was taking place within him, he stared at Marius’ note with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58309:About an hour later, Jean Valjean went out in the complete costume of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58332:Et prétend qu’hier Atala
tests/les_miserables.txt:58338:Parce que l’autre jour Mila
tests/les_miserables.txt:58344:Leur poison qui m’ensorcela
tests/les_miserables.txt:58400:Gavroche, with his experience of the things of this world, recognized a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58439:off in the direction of the Halles, pushing the cart before him at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58466:Vieilles-Haudriettes, found himself face to face with a uniform, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58554:delight, I abound in joy, but I’m losing my way, I shall have to take a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58574:Tout l’ancien monde s’écroula
tests/les_miserables.txt:58580:Cassons ce Louvre où s’étala
tests/les_miserables.txt:58686:words which we have just uttered, must be discarded, when it becomes a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58861:The valiant Colonel Monteynard admired this barricade with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58953:Enjolras had advised two hours of sleep. Advice from Enjolras was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:58994:At a given moment, every barricade inevitably becomes the raft of _la
tests/les_miserables.txt:59008:said:—“It’s the old stock of Father Hucheloup, who began business as a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59080:the senate, committed the acts of a king and almost of a tyrant, _regia
tests/les_miserables.txt:59092:Æantides! Oh! Who will grant me to pronounce the verses of Homer like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59107:almost disdain in advance the attack at dawn. They waited for it with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59165:Saint-Merry, the insurgents were raising that clamor which has become a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59181:given this formula of their common soul, there issued from all mouths a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59254:of little ones around them? Let that man of you who has never beheld a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59290:and you deliver over your daughters to the police. Friends, have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59301:there.’ So much the worse is easily said. My friends, there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59416:little brothers?”—“You are the father of five children.”—“You have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59465:himself: “Probably it is a reinforcement, in any case it is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59518:immense human republic. As far as the immediate means were concerned, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59557:promulgating itself by evidence, to a dawn of truth corresponding to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59588:called society. This intersection being a junction, this point is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59608:interruption of civilization depending on a marriage of kings, on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59609:birth in hereditary tyrannies, a partition of peoples by a congress, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59640:applause; but they whispered together for a long time. Speech being a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59721:Leaving his arms tied behind his back, they placed about his feet a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59746:The daylight was increasing rapidly. Not a window was opened, not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59768:barricade, walled on three streets, in front on the Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:59813:resolutions. To embark in death is sometimes the means of escaping a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59824:some sinister construction of iron was approaching. There arose a
tests/les_miserables.txt:59895:hundred leagues an hour; light travels seventy thousand leagues a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60032:executed, the discharge took place with the terrifying rattle of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60260:takes refuge in a slipper, that throat which veils itself before a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60305:soul; but hopes cut in twain by dejection—that was her case. She had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60415:June, 1832. A certain good dram-shop keeper of Pantin des Vertus or la
tests/les_miserables.txt:60421:detracted nothing from the bravery of the movement. The diminution of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60471:condottiere of the order of those whom we have just characterized, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60681:the two guns were furiously attacking the redoubt from the Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:60767:It will be remembered that Fannicot’s company had left behind it a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60775:of lofty houses. It rose gradually and was incessantly renewed; hence a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60790:another, and emptied the cartridge-box or cartouche as a monkey opens a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60873:him with their eyes. The barricade trembled; he sang. He was not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:60882:stagger, then he sank to the earth. The whole barricade gave vent to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61011:at once, great and petty. Horace was one of them; so was Goethe. La
tests/les_miserables.txt:61115:Here and there, at intervals, when the wind blew, shouts, clamor, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61141:his son “to avoid excesses.” He had an affable and haughty air, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61241:the dismal replies of the tocsin and the cannon. This coincided with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61354:come, they talk, they jest, they lounge. Some one whom we know heard a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61371:holster pistols, and a cudgel, with the care of a young girl setting a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61646:Jean Valjean with some difficulty, but without relaxing his hold for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61652:face, streaming hair, a pierced hand and the half nude breast of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61654:insurgents. The corpses carried away from the barricade formed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61813:Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61820:everywhere, the tocsin of Saint-Merry, which now had the accents of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61866:all things, don’t open the door.”—And the house assumes the air of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61939:this, I desire to live, leave me in peace.”—Hence, at certain hours, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61946:a violence for which it is just that it should be held to answer; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:61995:progress; they accomplish the will of Providence; they perform a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62025:hence the appeal to arms. But every insurrection, which aims at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62045:about to do. Who knows? We may succeed. We are few in number, we have a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62059:fragile because of their very weight, fear adventures; and there is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62083:Corinth, yes; Sybaris, no. Whoever becomes effeminate makes himself a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62160:and, at the point of this drama which we have now reached, the idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:62277:Then there burst forth on that heap of paving-stones, in that Rue de la
tests/les_miserables.txt:62346:like Phyles, father of Polydamas, to have brought back from Ephyra a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62372:and Combeferre, gave way. The cannon, though it had not effected a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62397:sufficient for that, and the door of that house, suddenly opened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62446:mutilating their prisoners, and that there was the headless body of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62592:hideous potion of absinthe-porter and alcohol had thrown him into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62663:omnibus, were slain by two shots fired from the attic. A man in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62724:For an instant, for two or three perhaps, this bit of wall was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62780:Jean Valjean found himself with Marius, who was still unconscious, in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62813:The Chinese, let us confess it to our shame, knew it before us. Not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62908:Economically considered, the matter can be summed up thus: Paris is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:62974:network of sewers, from a bird’s-eye view, will outline on the banks a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63012:thither, fierce and sly, through the Maubuée outlet, as into a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63037:engulfed, but they display themselves there. This mixture is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63154:At the beginning of this century, the sewer of Paris was still a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63156:evil renown reached the verge of the terrible. Paris knew, in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63159:fifteen long feet in length, and which might have served Behemoth for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63239:lanterns pined away in the foul atmosphere. From time to time, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63242:sewer had changed into a bottomless well; they found nothing solid; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63277:Beneath this long, arched drain which terminated at the Arche-Marion, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63285:on one side the pig hooded with a cardinal’s hat, and on the other, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63299:Marat in his youth had had amorous intrigues. This was when he was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63343:apparatus of Babylon, a cavern, ditch, gulf pierced with streets, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63372:subordinated to the shortest road. The sewer has, nowadays, assumed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63411:ten centuries have toiled at it without being able to bring it to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63414:Within the bosom of the earth, it is a sort of mysterious polyp with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63479:eleven metres; after having—a thing heretofore unseen—made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63510:sunken causeways. At the end of a slope, where the tributaries of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63546:be represented by a disk five and twenty leagues in circumference; a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63560:Through this simple act, the entire social community will experience a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63689:trickling down upon him and making its way under his clothes. But a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63694:preceding day had not, as yet, entirely run off, and it created a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63821:All at once, he saw his shadow in front of him. It was outlined on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63834:In the rear of that star eight or ten forms were moving about in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63884:There existed at that epoch at this point of the Montmartre sewer a
tests/les_miserables.txt:63929:shadows; and Jean Valjean, not daring to stir as yet, remained for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64079:this fact to abandon all dissimulation and to walk very rapidly. In a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64106:although no sound had been heard, a singular circumstance in so rusty a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64108:indicated that the man before whom that door had just opened had not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64232:eyes were closed, his hair was plastered down on his temples like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64264:Ménilmontant, is about two leagues long. It is paved throughout a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64291:He felt that he was entering the water, and that he no longer had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64294:It sometimes happens, that on certain shores of Bretagne or Scotland a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64318:indescribable terror, he recognizes the fact that he is caught in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64332:effort that you attempt, at every shout that you utter, draws you a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64410:the dying man knows not whether he is on the point of becoming a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64445:names; among others, that of the sewerman who was swallowed up in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64476:sands of the Quartier Saint-Georges, which could only be conquered by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64487:unhealthy; it was dangerous. It is true that they had four months and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64508:not, obviously, uphold two. Marius and Jean Valjean would have stood a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64523:seen him in that gloom would have thought that what he beheld was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64583:in as the vault grew lower. The tunnel ended like the interior of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64759:“You will need a stone also, but you can find one outside. There’s a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64766:“Idiot, you’ll want to sling that stiff into the river, you’ll need a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64795:to force him to talk. He jostled his shoulder in an attempt to catch a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64868:While handling Marius’ coat, Thénardier, with the skill of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64915:for Jean Valjean to pass out, closed the grating again, gave the key a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64940:drawing on, the great deliverer, the friend of all those who need a
tests/les_miserables.txt:64988:ordinary man would have been alarmed because of the twilight, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65006:upon has a scent which never deceives him; it was necessary to fling a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65022:his bludgeon in his fist, by an imperceptible movement, and said in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65165:confronting each other, he gave a violent peal. The gate opened a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65182:less feebly, as though the movement of the carriage had brought about a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65344:their stations. The window on the landing-place, which was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65386:the pocket-book, had turned aside and made the tour of his ribs with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65407:The doctor seemed to be pondering sadly. From time to time, he made a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65692:authority fell lower than the man of the galleys, in the second, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65707:his functions, would have been for him in any case useless and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65759:soul—admiration for a convict. Respect for a galley-slave—is that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65847:in his grasp had he confessed to himself that he entertained the idea
tests/les_miserables.txt:65949:Up to this point, everything above him had been, to his gaze, merely a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65965:suddenly find himself caught between two crimes—the crime of allowing a
tests/les_miserables.txt:65992:the summit of all that ruin, a man with a green cap on his head and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66003:himself, with a firm tread, towards the station-house indicated by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66165:to make out whether he had been there in the quality of a robber or a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66183:Boulatruelle, although intoxicated, had a correct and lucid memory, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66206:the parish of that parishioner. This prowler of Patron-Minette has a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66225:themselves up again with the graceful deliberation of the arms of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66226:pretty woman who stretches herself when she wakes, pointed out to him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66241:The man entered, or rather, glided into, an open glade, at a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66244:a large pile of porous stones, an ailing chestnut-tree bandaged with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66330:sorrowful night when he had been brought back to his grandfather in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66463:Marius, he told himself that he had no true kindness to expect from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66471:other, by means of a certain way of turning his phrases. Obviously, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66715:octavo volume enveloped in paper. The enveloping paper was of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66800:envious glance of an owl at two turtledoves, it was the stupid eye of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66829:Sainte-Catherine whom I should always like to see uncoiffed.62 It’s a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66835:back on the Society of the Virgin; but, sapristi, a handsome husband, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66875:is a very little girl and a very great lady. She will only be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:66913:They were turned over and counted. There were five hundred notes for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67001:The grandfather was not the least happy of them all. He remained for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67047:As for the five hundred and eighty thousand francs, they constituted a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67093:damasks, lampas, painted moires, robes of shot gros de Tours, India
tests/les_miserables.txt:67094:kerchiefs embroidered in gold that could be washed, dauphines without a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67132:waterworks of Versailles. Give me my shepherdess and try to make her a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67145:fishes, Phœbus and Phœbe, and a host of things which emerged from a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67199:garter, Homer would construct the _Iliad_. He would put in his poem, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67205:wants to have its wedding also. People supped well, and had at table a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67209:a branch of lilacs or a tuft of roses; whether he was a shepherd or a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67212:They embroidered and tinted themselves. A bourgeois had the air of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67235:cathedral of Rheims to the pagoda of Chanteloup. I have a horror of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67249:and entirely naked, an Academician offering quatrains to the goddess, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67298:have left him poor. “So much the worse for my nephew! he is wedding a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67316:with a buttercup-colored satin ground, covered with velvet auricula
tests/les_miserables.txt:67347:under all forms lavished on every one, like the air and the sun in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67349:they almost conversed. M. Fauchelevent talked well, and even with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67496:casting upon that buried name its sinister light like a candle beside a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67599:On examining the coat, it was found that one skirt had been torn in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67617:And that corpse I was. He said to himself: ‘There may still be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67692:honest, and decent, does happiness no harm, and that, in short, it is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67747:to Jean Valjean; he crushed the thumb of his right hand. This was not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67768:guests observed that it was Shrove Tuesday, and that there would be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67806:England cracked her whip; Lord Seymour’s post-chaise, harassed by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67829:maskers are very familiar to Parisians. If they were missing on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67859:cuckoo carriage, whose imperial they load down, or they overwhelm a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67898:King has Roquelaure, the populace has the Merry-Andrew. Paris is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:67930:with an enormous nose, an elderly air, and huge black moustache, and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68199:becoming transfigured in the light. One would have pronounced her a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68257:contemplate each other. Cosette perceived Marius in the midst of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68268:of joy. How good it is to have suffered! Their unhappiness formed a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68338:in with bouquets, so that where there was not a light, there was a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68348:courtesy, spreading out her bridal toilet with both hands, and with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68388:That empty armchair chilled the effusion of the wedding feast for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68475:I, too, have meditated, I, too, have sighed; I, too, have had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68492:what I say to you. It is good sense. And good sense cannot lie. Be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68558:their chamber a confused rustling of wings. Perfect happiness implies a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68569:no other pearl to be found in the shadowy folds of life. To love is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68629:Then he sought his own chamber once more, and set his candle on a
tests/les_miserables.txt:68937:title, and that flatters them. Marius, be it said in passing, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69001:supreme felicity. There had always existed, as the reader knows, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69094:galleys. For theft. Then, I was condemned for life for theft, for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69188:“From what motive, in fact, has this convict just said ‘I am a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69203:shall give Cosette my arm . . . Madame Pontmercy, excuse me, it is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69220:that she is with a man whom she loves, and that there exists here a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69266:when we four were together, your grandfather, you two and myself, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69350:under it is dishonest. Letters of the alphabet can be filched, like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69351:purse or a watch. To be a false signature in flesh and blood, to be a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69399:there, we are conversing, we are laughing; all at once, you hear a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69625:“Now,” said Cosette, adjusting a fold of her dressing-gown, with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69667:At that word Jean Valjean trembled in every limb. He fixed on Marius a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69742:his eyes, but only a sort of tragic flame. His voice had regained a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69802:Was the happiness of Marius and Cosette thenceforth condemned to such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69907:But all this went on as in a storm. Marius, while endeavoring to form a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69919:man taken to flight on the arrival of the police, instead of entering a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69943:half turned towards good; and those hearts are so constituted that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69950:that Jean Valjean’s existence had elbowed that of Cosette for so long a
tests/les_miserables.txt:69986:What was that cesspool which had venerated that innocence to such a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70031:In whatever circle of ideas Marius revolved, he always returned to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70035:forced to fall back upon this: the man was a convict; that is to say, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70082:have lingered behind it on the brow of that angel? The spattering of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70134:that convict had been everything good, paternal and respectable that a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70158:had received his orders. It sometimes happens that one says to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70226:“I expected that reply. Good. I warn you that I am going to make a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70372:“Just now, as I was coming hither,” replied Jean Valjean, “I saw a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70497:other men, he goes and comes. No one knows that he bears within him a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70499:unhappy man, and of which he is dying. No one knows that this man is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70568:extinction ensued. No more familiarity, no more good-morning with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70625:that word had its absolute meaning for Jean Valjean. He hazarded a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70673:had presented itself to the mind of Marius? Was Jean Valjean really a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70745:the ground-floor room. The armchairs had disappeared. There was not a
tests/les_miserables.txt:70850:of joy illuminated his pupils like an inward aurora, he had a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71222:with a violet glass which is stuck fast, by means of this wax, to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71272:The sense of smell, that mysterious aid to memory, had just revived a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71311:Marius’ emotion was profound. After a start of surprise, he underwent a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71358:shop hung a social status, threadbare and worn; here the suit of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71361:habiliments of a man of letters, and further on the dress of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71414:The man replied with an amiable grin of which the caressing smile of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71419:monsieur personally, several years ago, at the house of Madame la
tests/les_miserables.txt:71455:“Monsieur le Baron, deign to listen to me. There is in America, in a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71614:you is known to myself alone. This concerns the fortune of Madame la
tests/les_miserables.txt:71668:Then he flicked a grain of dust from the sleeve of his coat with a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71739:to them, who bullied rascals like a judge, and who paid them like a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71781:himself strong. For men of Thénardier’s nature, every dialogue is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71815:than you do. Jean Valjean, as you have said, is an assassin and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71954:fortune really belonged to him! he is Madeleine, the providence of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:71986:it the source of the fortune so skilfully presented to Madame la
tests/les_miserables.txt:72044:such a thing. As for the theft, that is understood; one does not kill a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72185:“Cosette! Cosette!” he cried. “Come! come quick! Let us go. Basque, a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72310:saying to myself: ‘All is over. Here is her little gown, I am a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72524:and he does not change his mind; it is useful for me to go. Death is a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72545:word: “Monsieur? . . .” But his manner of pronouncing it contained a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72696:of thee to place that pillow under my loins! Thou wilt weep for me a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72706:dinners to thy friends, and be very happy. I was writing to Cosette a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72929:suffering, and I try to assuage it, I possess only the puny forces of a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72984:repaired, greater successes assured for the morrow,—all was lost by a
tests/les_miserables.txt:72993:13 (return) [ Lawyer Corbeau, perched on a docket, held in his beak a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73152:worth of chestnuts. The first time that, in my joyous den, I snatched a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73160:gendarmes that I may say a word to them. With a blue capote and a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73168:And pretends that yesterday, Atala
tests/les_miserables.txt:73186:57 (return) [ But some prisons still remain, and I am going to put a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73227:69 (return) [ _Un fafiot sérieux. Fafiot_ is the slang term for a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73286:possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73458:1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73460:receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
tests/les_miserables.txt:73543:States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
